The Project Gutenberg eBook of Tales And Novels, Volume 5 (of 10), by Maria Edgeworth

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Tales And Novels, Volume 5 (of 10)
       Tales of a Fashionable Life: Manoeuvring; Almeria; and Vivian.

Author: Maria Edgeworth

Release Date: September 30, 2003 [eBook #9414]
[Most recently updated: March 5, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Jonathan Ingram, Tapio Riikonen and PG Distributed Proofreaders and David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS, VOLUME 5 (OF 10) ***




TALES AND NOVELS, VOL. V

MANOEUVRING; ALMERIA; AND VIVIAN. (TALES OF FASHIONABLE LIFE.)

By Maria Edgeworth


In Ten Volumes. With Engravings On Steel.


1857.




VIVIAN.



PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


Miss Edgeworth’s general views, in these stories, are explained in the
preface to the first volume. I cannot, however, omit repeating, that
public favour has not yet rendered her so presumptuous as to offer hasty
effusions to her readers, but that she takes a longer time to revise
what she writes than the severe ancients required for the highest
species of moral fiction.

Vivian exposes one of the most common defects of mankind. To be “infirm
of purpose” is to be at the mercy of the artful or at the disposal of
accident. Look round, and count the numbers who have, within your own
knowledge, failed from want of firmness.

An excellent and wise mother gave the following advice with her dying
breath: “My son, learn early how to say, No!”--This precept gave the
first idea of the story of Vivian.

THE ABSENTEE is not intended as a censure upon those whose duties, and
employments, and superior talents, lead them to the capital; but to warn
the thoughtless and the unoccupied from seeking distinction by frivolous
imitation of fashion and ruinous waste of fortune.

A country gentleman, or even a nobleman, who does not sit in parliament,
may be as usefully and as honourably employed in Yorkshire, Mid Lothian,
or Ireland, as at a club-house or an assembly in London.

Irish agents are here described as of two different species. That there
have been bad and oppressive Irish agents, many great landed English
proprietors have felt; that there are well-informed, just, and
honourable Irish agents, every-day experience can testify.

MADAME DE FLEURY points out some of the means which may be employed
by the rich for the real advantage of the poor. This story shows that
sowing gold does not always produce a golden harvest; but that knowledge
and virtue, when early implanted in the human breast, seldom fail to
make ample returns of prudence and felicity.

EMILIE DE COULANGES exposes a fault into which the good and generous are
liable to fall.

Great sacrifices and great benefits cannot frequently be made or
conferred by private individuals; but, every day, kindness and attention
to the common feelings of others is within the power, and may be the
practice, of every age, and sex, and station. Common faults are reproved
by all writers on morality; but there are errors and defects that
require to be treated in a lighter manner, and that come, with
propriety, within the province of essayists and of writers for the
stage.

R. L. EDGEWORTH. _May_, 1812.




CHAPTER I.

“To see the best, and yet the worse pursue.”


“Is it possible,” exclaimed Vivian, “that you, Russell, my friend, my
best friend, can tell me that this line is the motto of my character!--’
To see the best, and yet the worse pursue.--Then you must think me
either a villain or a madman.”

“No,” replied Russell, calmly; “I think you only weak.”

“Weak--but you must think me an absolute fool.”

“No, not a fool; the weakness of which I accuse you is not a weakness
of the understanding. I find no fault either with the logical or the
mathematical part of your understanding. It is not erroneous in either
of the two great points in which Bacon says that most men’s minds be
deficient in--the power of judging of consequences, or in the power of
estimating the comparative value of objects.”

“Well,” cried Vivian, impatiently, “but I don’t want to hear just now
what Bacon says--but what _you_ think. Tell me all the faults of my
character.”

“All!--unconscionable!--after the fatigue of this long day’s journey,”
 said Russell, laughing.

These two friends were, at this time, travelling from Oxford to Vivian
Hall (in ----shire), the superb seat of the Vivian family, to which
Vivian was heir. Mr. Russell, though he was but a few years older than
Vivian, had been his tutor at college; and by an uncommon transition,
had, from his tutor, become his intimate friend.

After a pause, Vivian resumed, “Now I think of it, Russell, you are to
blame, if I have any faults. Don’t you say, that every thing is to
be done by education? And are not you--though by much too young, and
infinitely too handsome, for a philosopher--are not you my guide,
philosopher, and friend?”

“But I have had the honour to be your guide, philosopher, and friend,
only for these three years,” said Russell. “I believe in the rational,
but not in the magical, power of education. How could I do, or undo, in
three years, the work of the preceding seventeen?”

“Then, if you won’t let me blame you, I must blame my mother.”

“Your mother!--I had always understood that she had paid particular
attention to your early education, and all the world says that Lady
Mary Vivian, though a woman of fashion, is remarkably well-informed and
domestic; and, judging from those of her letters which you have shown
me, I should think that, for once, what all the world says is right.”

“What all the world says is right, and yet I am not wrong:--my mother
is a very clever woman, and most affectionate, and she certainly paid
particular attention to my early education; but her attention was too
particular, her care was too great. You know I was an only son--then
I lost my father when I was an infant; and a woman, let her be ever
so sensible, cannot well educate an _only_ son, without some manly
assistance; the fonder she is of the son the worse, even if her fondness
is not foolish fondness--it makes her over-anxious--it makes her do too
much. My mother took too much, a great deal too much, care of me; she
over-educated, over-instructed, over-dosed me with premature lessons of
prudence: she was so afraid that I should ever do a foolish thing, or
not say a wise one, that she prompted my every word, and guided my every
action. So I grew up, seeing with her eyes, hearing with her ears, and
judging with her understanding, till, at length, it was found out that
I had not eyes, ears, or understanding of my own. When I was
between twelve and thirteen, my mother began to think that I was not
sufficiently manly for my age, and that there was something too yielding
and undecided in my character. Yielding and undecided! -- No wonder! --
Had I not been from my cradle under the necessity of always yielding,
and in the habit of never deciding for myself! Seized with a panic, my mother, to make
a man of me at once, sent me to ---- Harrow. There I was, with all
convenient expedition, made ashamed of every thing good I had learned at
home; and there I learned every thing bad, and nothing good, that could
be learned at school. I was inferior in Latin and Greek; and this was a
deficiency I could not make up without more labour than I had courage to
undertake. I was superior in general literature, but this was of
little value amongst my competitors, and therefore I despised it; and,
overpowered by numbers and by ridicule, I was, of course, led into all
sorts of folly, by mere _mauvaise honte_. Had I been in the habit of
exercising my own judgment, or had my resolution been strengthened by
degrees; had I, in short, been prepared for a school, I might, perhaps,
have acquired, by a public education, a manly, independent spirit. If
I had even been wholly bred up in a public school, I might have been
forced, as others were, by early and fair competition, to exercise my
own powers, and by my own experience in that microcosm, as it has been
called, I might have formed some rules of conduct, some manliness
of character, and might have made, at least, a good schoolboy. Half
home-bred, and half school-bred, from want of proper preparation,
one half of my education totally destroyed the other. From school, of
course, I went to college, and at college, of course, I should have
become one of the worst species of college lads, and should have had
no chance, in my whole future life, of being any thing but a dissipated
fool of fashion, one of the _Four-in-Hand Club_, or the _Barouche Club_,
or the _Tandem Club_, or the _Defiance Club_, had not I, by the greatest
good fortune, met with such a friend as you, and, by still greater good
fortune, found you out for myself; for if my mother had recommended you
to me, I should have considered you only as a college tutor; I should
never have discovered half your real merit; I doubt whether I should
have even seen that you are young and handsome: so prejudiced should I
have been with the preconceived notion of a college tutor, that I am not
certain whether I should have found out that you are a gentleman as well
born and well bred as myself; but, be that as it may, I am positive that
I never should have made you my companion and friend; I should never
have thrown open my whole soul to you, as I have done; nor could you
ever have obtained such wondrous power as you possess over my mind, if
you had been recommended to me by my mother.”

“I am sorry,” said Russell, smiling, “that, after so many wise
reflections, and so many fine compliments, you end by proving to me that
my wondrous power is founded on your wondrous weakness. I am mortified
to find that your esteem and friendship for me depended so much upon my
not having had the honour of your mother’s recommendation; and have not
I reason to fear, that now, when I have a chance of becoming acquainted
with Lady Mary Vivian, and, perhaps, a chance of her thinking me a fit
companion and friend for her son, I must lose his regard and
confidence, because I shall labour under the insuperable objection of an
affectionate mother’s approbation?”

“No, no,” said Vivian; “my wilful folly does not go quite so far as
that. So that I maintain the privilege of choosing my friends for
myself, I shall always be pleased and proud to find my mother approve my
choice.”

After a few moments’ pause, Vivian added, “You misunderstand, quite
misunderstand me, if you think that I am not fond of my mother. I
respect and love her with all my soul:--I should be a most ungrateful
wretch if I did not. I did very wrong to speak as I did just now, of
any little errors she may have made in my education; but, believe me, I
would not have said so much to any one living but yourself, nor to you,
but in strict confidence; and, after all, I don’t know whether I ought
not to lay the blame of my faults on my masters more than on my poor
mother.”

“Lay the blame where we will,” said Russell, “remember, that the
punishment will rest on ourselves. We may, with as much philosophic
justice as possible, throw the blame of our faults on our parents and
preceptors, and on the early mismanagement of our minds; yet, after we
have made out our case in the abstract, to the perfect satisfaction of a
jury of metaphysicians, when we come to _overt_ actions, all our judges,
learned and unlearned, are so awed, by the ancient precedents and
practice of society, and by the obsolete law of common sense, that they
finish by pronouncing against us the barbarous sentence, that every man
must suffer for his own faults.”

“‘I hope I shall be able to bear it, my lord,’ as the English sailor
said when the judge----But look out there! Let down that glass on your
side of the carriage!” cried Vivian, starting forward. “There’s Vivian
Hall!”

“That fine old castle?” said Russell, looking out of the window.

“No, that's Glistonbury Castle; but farther off to the left, don’t you see amongst the trees that
house with wings?”

“Ha! quite a new, modern house: I had always fancied that Vivian Hall
was an old pile of building.”

“So it was, till my father threw down the old hall, and built this new
house.”

“And a very handsome one it is.--Is it as good within as without?”

“Quite, I think; but I’ll leave you to judge for yourself.--Are not
those fine old trees in the park?”

From this time till the travellers arrived at Vivian Hall, their
conversation turned upon trees, and avenues, and serpentine
_approaches_, and alterations that Vivian intended to make, when he
should be of age, and master of this fine place; and he now wanted but a
twelvemonth of being at legal years of discretion. When they arrived at
the hall, Lady Mary Vivian showed much affectionate joy at the sight of
her son, and received Mr. Russell with such easy politeness that he was
prepossessed at first in her favour. To this charm of well-bred manners
was united the appearance of sincerity and warmth of feeling. In
her conversation there was a mixture of excellent sense and general
literature with the frivolities of the fashionable world, and the
anecdotes of the day in certain high circles, of which she seemed to
talk more from habit than taste, and to annex importance more from the
compulsion of external circumstances than from choice. But her son,--her
son was the great object of all her thoughts, serious or frivolous.
She was delighted by the improvements she saw in his understanding
and character; by the taste and talents he displayed, both for fine
literature and for solid information: this flattered her hope that he
would both shine as a polished gentleman and make a figure in public
life. To his friend Russell she attributed these happy improvements;
and, though he was not a tutor of her own original selection, yet
her pride, on this occasion, yielded to gratitude, and she graciously
declared, that she could not feel jealous of the pre-eminent power he
had obtained over her son, when she saw the admirable use he made of
this influence. Vivian, like all candid and generous persons, being
peculiarly touched by candour and generosity in others, felt his
affection for his mother rapidly increased by this conduct; nor did his
enthusiasm for his friend in the least abate, in consequence of the high
approbation with which she honoured him, nor even in consequence of her
ladyship’s frequent and rather injudicious expressions of her hopes,
that her son would always preserve and show himself worthy of such a
friend.

He joined in his mother’s entreaties to Russell to prolong his visit;
and as her ladyship declared she thought it of essential consequence to
her son’s interest and future happiness, that he should, at this _turn
of his life_, have such a companion, Russell consented to remain with
him some time longer. All parties were thus pleased with each other, and
remained united by one common interest about the same objects, during
several weeks of a delightful summer. But, alas! this family harmony,
and this accord of reason and _will_, between the mother and son, were
not of longer duration. As usual, there were faults on both sides.

Lady Mary Vivian, whose hopes of her son’s distinguishing himself by his
abilities had been much exalted since his last return from Oxford, had
indulged herself in pleasing anticipations of the time when he should
make his appearance in the fashionable and in the political world. She
foresaw the respect that would be paid to her, on his account, both by
senators and by matrons; by ministers, who might want to gain a rising
orator’s vote, and by mothers, who might wish to make an excellent match
for their daughters: not only by all mothers who had daughters to marry,
but by all daughters who had hearts or hands to dispose of, Lady
Mary felt secure of having her society courted. Now, she had rather
extravagant expectations for her son: she expected him to marry, so as
to secure domestic happiness, and, at the same time, to have fashion,
and beauty, and rank, and high connexions, and every amiable quality in
a wife. This vision of a future daughter-in-law continually occupied her
ladyship’s imagination. Already, with maternal _Alnascharism_, she had,
in her reveries, thrown back her head with disdain, as she repulsed the
family advances of some wealthy but low-born heiress, or as she rejected
the alliance of some of the new nobility. Already she had arranged
the very words of her answers to these, and determined the degrees and
shades of her intimacies with those; already had she settled

“To whom to nod, whom take into her coach, Whom honour with her hand;”

when one morning, as she sat at work, absorbed in one of these reveries,
she was so far “rapt into future times,” that, without perceiving that
any body was present, she began to speak her thoughts, and said aloud to
herself, “As if my son could possibly think of her!”

Her son, who was opposite to her, lying on a sofa, reading, or seeming
to read, started up, and putting down his book, exclaimed, in a
voice which showed at once that he was conscious of thinking of some
particular person, and determined to persist in the thought, “As if your
son could possibly think of her!----Of whom, ma’am?”

“What’s the matter, child? Are you mad?”

“Not in the least, ma’am; but you said----”

“What!” cried Lady Mary, looking round; “What did I say, that has
occasioned so much disturbance?--I was not conscious of saying any
thing. My dear Selina,” continued her ladyship, appealing to a young
lady, who sat very intent upon some drawing beside her, “my dear Selina,
you must have heard; what did I say?”

The young lady looked embarrassed; and the colour which spread over her
face, brought a sudden suspicion into Lady Mary’s mind: her eye darted
back upon her son--the suspicion, the fear was confirmed; and she grew
instantly pale, silent, and breathless, in the attitude in which she was
struck with this panic. The young lady’s blush and embarrassment had a
very different effect on Vivian; joy suddenly sparkled in his eyes, and
illumined his whole countenance, for this was the first instant he had
ever felt any hope of having obtained an interest in her heart. He was
too much transported at this moment to think either of prudence or
of his mother; and, when he recollected himself, he was too little
practised in dissimulation to repair his indiscretion. Something he did
attempt to say, and blundered, and laughed at his blunder; and when his
mother looked up at him, in serious silence, he only begged pardon for
his folly, confessed he believed he was mad, and, turning away abruptly,
left the room, exclaiming that he wondered where Russell had been all
the morning, and that he must go and look for him. A long silence
ensued between Vivian’s mother and the young lady, who were left alone
together. Lady Mary first broke the silence, and, in a constrained tone,
asked, as she took up the newspaper, “Whether Miss Sidney had found any
news?”

“I don’t know, ma’am,” answered Miss Sidney, in a voice scarcely
articulate.

“I should have imagined there must be some news from the continent:
but you did not find any, I think you say, Miss Sidney;” continued Lady
Mary, with haughty, averted eyes. After turning over the pages of the
paper, without knowing one word it contained, she laid it down, and rose
to leave the room. Miss Sidney rose at the same time.

“Lady Mary, one instant; my dear Lady Mary.”

Lady Mary turned, and saw Selina’s supplicating eyes full of tears; but
her ladyship, still retaining her severity of manner, coldly said, “Does
Miss Sidney desire that I should stay?--Does Miss Sidney wish to speak
to me?”

“I do--as soon as I can,” said Selina in a faltering voice; but, raising
her eyes, and perceiving the contemptuous expression of Lady Mary’s
countenance, her own instantly changed. With the firm tone of conscious
innocence, she repeated, “I do wish to speak to your ladyship, if you
will hear me with your usual candour; I do not expect or solicit your
usual indulgence.”

“Miss Sidney,” replied Lady Mary, “before you say more, it becomes me to
point out to you, that the moment is past for confidence between us two;
and that in no moment could I wish to hear from any person, much less
from one whom I had considered as my friend, confessions, extorted by
circumstances, degrading and unavailing.”

“Your ladyship need not be apprehensive of hearing from me any degrading
confessions,” said Miss Sidney; “I have none to make: and since, without
any just cause, without any cause for suspicion, but what a blush,
perhaps, or a moment’s embarrassment of manner may have created, you
think it becomes you to point out to me that the moment for confidence
between us is past, I can only lament my mistake in having believed that
it ever existed.”

Lady Mary’s countenance and manner totally changed. The pride of rank
yielded before the pride of virtue; and perhaps the hope that she had
really no cause for suspicion at once restored her affection for her
young friend. “Let us understand one another, my dear Selina,” said she;
“if I said a hasty or a harsh word, forgive it. You know my affection
for you, and my real confidence; in actions, not in words, I have shown
it.--In thought, as well as in actions, my confidence in you has been
entire; for, _upon my word,_ and you know this is not an asseveration I
lightly use, _upon my word,_ till that unfortunate moment, a suspicion
of you never crossed my imagination. The proof--if there could need any
proof to you of what I assert--the proof is, the delight I take in your
society, the urgent manner in which I have so frequently, this summer,
begged your company from your mother. You know this would have not only
been the height of insincerity, but of folly and madness, if I had
not felt a reliance upon you that made me consider it as an absolute
impossibility that you could ever disappoint my friendship.”

“I thank your ladyship,” said Selina, softened by the kind tone in which
Lady Mary now spoke, yet still retaining some reserve of manner;
“I thank your ladyship for all your kindness--it has flattered me
much--touched me deeply--commanded my gratitude, and influenced my
conduct uniformly--I can and do entirely forgive the injustice of a
moment; and I now bid you adieu, my dear Lady Mary, with the conviction
that, if we were never to meet again, I should always hold that place in
your esteem and affection with which you have honoured me, and which, if
it be not too proud an expression, I hope I have deserved----Won’t you
bid me farewell?”

The tears gushed from Lady Mary’s eyes. “My dear, charming, and prudent
Selina, I understand you perfectly--and I thank you: it grieves me to
part with you--but I believe you are right--I believe there is no other
safety--no other remedy. How, indeed, could I expect that my son could
see and hear you--live in the house with you, and become intimately
acquainted with such a character as yours, without danger! I have
been very imprudent, unaccountably imprudent, to expose him to such
a temptation; but I hope, I trust, that your prudence will repair, in
time, the effects of my rashness--and again and again I thank you, my
dear young friend--but, perhaps it might be still better that you should
not leave us abruptly. Still better than your absence, I think, would be
the conviction you might impress on his mind of the impossibility of
his hopes: if you were to stay a day or two, and convince him by your
indifference that----” “Excuse me, that is what I cannot undertake,”
 said Selina, blushing, and conscious of blushing. Lady Mary was too
polite and too delicate to seem to observe her confusion, but, embracing
her, said--“If we must part, then take with you my highest esteem,
affection, and gratitude; and this much let me add, that my most
sanguine expectations for my son’s happiness would be realized, if
amongst the women to whom family interests must restrict his choice, he
could meet with one of half your merit, and half your attractions.”

“_Amongst the women to whom family interests must restrict his choice_,”
 repeated Selina to herself many times, as she journeyed homewards; and
she pondered much upon the meaning of this phrase. Vivian was sole
heir to a very large property, without encumbrances of any kind; what,
therefore, was the necessity that restricted his choice? The imaginary
necessity of ambition, which confined him to a certain circle of
fashionable, or _highly connected_ people. Selina Sidney, though she was
not rich, was of a very good gentleman’s family; her father had been a
colonel in the British army: during his life, Mrs. Sidney had been in
the habit of living a great deal in what is called _the world,_ and
in the best company; and though, since his death, she had lived in
retirement, Miss Sidney had received an education which put her upon a
footing with young ladies of the highest accomplishments and refinement
in the kingdom. With every solid and amiable quality, she had all those
external advantages of appearance and manner which Lady Mary Vivian
valued most highly. Selina, who was convinced that Lady Mary appreciated
her character, and was peculiarly fond of her company and conversation,
could not but feel surprise, mixed with some indignation, perhaps with a
little resentment, when she perceived that her ladyship’s prejudices
and ambition made her act so completely in contradiction to her better
judgment, to her professions, and to her feelings of affection. Whatever miss Sidney thought upon
this subject, however, she determined to continue to act in the most honourable
manner towards her friend; she had never, till this day, had the least idea
that Vivian loved her; but the plesure she had for a moment felt at the
discovery, or bare suspicion of his love, convinced her, that it was most
prudent to retreat immediately; and no false pride, or weak self-delusion,
had, even in the moment when she was most irritated by Lady Mary's haughty
suspicions, prevent her from doing what she knew to be right, and to be
best for her own happiness. Selina's exquisite sensibility could be equalled
only by her strong sense of duty; and, concscious of this real, but concealed
tenderness of heart, she was aware, that it required peculiar prudence to guard
herself from the dangers of an unhappy passion. She thought it most probable,
that the love which Vivian felt for her might only be of a transient nature,
a passion such as young men feel for the first pleasing young woman they see,
which is easily transferred to a new object. Vivian was not yet of age -- of a
fortune far superior to her expectations -- his mother and his guardian
disapproved of his attachment -- this mother was Selina's friend, and had
treated her with the utmost kindness. All these reasons combined, determined
miss Sidney to avoid seeing Vivian any more -- an excellent resolution, in
which we leave her, and return to her lover.

A walk with Russell had brought him back in the full determination of
avowing his attachment sincerely to his mother, and of speaking to her
ladyship in the most respectful manner; but, when he found that Miss
Sidney was gone, anger and disappointment made him at once forget his
prudence, and his intended respect; he declared, in the most passionate
terms, his love for Selina Sidney, and his irrevocable determination
to pursue her, to the end of time and space, in spite of all opposition
whatsoever from any person whatever. His mother, who was prepared for a
scene of this sort, though not for one of this violence, had sufficient
command of temper to sustain it properly; her command of temper was,
indeed, a little assisted by the hope that this passion would be
transitory in proportion to its vehemence, much by the confidence she
had in Miss Sidney’s _honour_, and in her absence: Lady Mary, therefore,
calmly disclaimed having had any part in persuading Miss Sidney to that
measure which had so much enraged her lover; but her ladyship avowed,
that though it had not been necessary for her to suggest the measure,
she highly approved of it, and admired now, as she had ever admired,
that young lady’s prudent and noble conduct.

Softened by the only thing that could, at this moment, soften
him--praise of his mistress--Vivian, in a most affectionate manner,
assured his mother that it was her warm eulogiums of Miss Sidney which
had first turned his attention to the perfections of her character; and
he now inquired what possible objections she could make to his choice.
With the generous enthusiasm of his disposition, heightened by all the
eloquence of love, he pleaded, that his fortune was surely sufficient to
put him above mercenary considerations in the choice of a wife; that in
every point, except this one of _money_, Selina Sidney was, in his own
mother’s opinion, superior to every other woman she could name, or wish
for, as a daughter-in-law.

“But my tastes are not to blind me to your interests,” said Lady Mary;
“you are entitled to look for rank and high connexion. You are the
representative of an ancient family, have talents to make a figure in
public; and, in short, prejudice or not, I confess it is one of the
first wishes of my heart that you should marry into a noble family, or
at least into one that shall strengthen your political interest, as well
as secure your domestic happiness.”

Vivian, of course, cursed ambition, as all men do whilst they are in
love. His arguments and his eloquence in favour of a _private station_,
and of the joys of _learned leisure, a competence, and domestic bliss_,
were worthy of the most renowned of ancient or modern philosophers.
Russell was appealed to with much eagerness, both by mother and son,
during their debates. He frankly declared to Lady Mary, that he thought
her son perfectly right in all he now urged, and especially in his
opinion of Miss Sidney; “but at the same time,” added Russell, “I
apprehend that he speaks, at this moment, more from passion than from
reason; and I fear that, in the course of a few months, he might,
perhaps, entirely change his mind: therefore, I think your ladyship is
prudent in refusing, during the minority of your son, your consent to a
hasty union, of which he might afterwards repent, and thus render both
himself and a most amiable woman miserable.”

Russell, after having given his opinion with the utmost freedom, when
it was required by Lady Mary, assured her that he should no farther
interfere; and he trusted his present sincerity would be the best pledge
to her of his future discretion and honour. This equitable judgment and
sincerity of Russell’s at first displeased both parties, but in time
operated upon the reason of both; not, however, before contests had gone
on long and loud between the mother and son--not before a great deal
of nonsense had been talked on both sides. People of the best abilities
often talk the most nonsense where their passions are concerned, because
then the whole of their ingenuity is exercised to find arguments in
favour of their folly. They are not, like fools, content to say, _This
is my will_; but they pique themselves on giving reasons for their
will; and their reasons are the reasons of madmen, excellent upon
false premises. It happened here, as in most family quarrels, that the
disputants did not allow sufficiently for the prejudices and errors
incident to their different ages. The mother would not allow for the
romantic notions of the son, nor could the son endure the worldly views
of the mother. The son, who had as yet no experience of the transitory
nature of the passion of love, thought his mother unfeeling and
barbarous, for opposing him on the point where the whole happiness of
his life was concerned; the mother, who had seen the decline and fall of
so many _everlasting loves_, considered him only as a person in a fever;
and thought she prevented him, by her calmness, from doing that which he
would repent when he should regain his sober senses. Without detailing
the daily disputes which now arose, it will be sufficient to mark the
result.

Vivian’s love had been silent, tranquil, and not seemingly of any great
consequence, till it was opposed; but, from the instant that an obstacle
intervened, it gathered strength and force, and it presently rose
rapidly, with prodigious uproar, threatening to burst all bounds, and to
destroy every thing that stopped its course. Lady Mary was now inclined
to try what effect lessening the opposition might produce. To do her
justice, she was also moved to this by some nobler motives than fear;
or, at least, her fears were not of a selfish kind: she dreaded that her
son’s health and permanent happiness might be injured by this violent
passion; she was apprehensive of becoming an object of his aversion;
of utterly losing his confidence, and all power over his mind; but,
chiefly, her generous temper was moved and won by Selina Sidney’s
admirable conduct. During the whole time that Vivian used every means
to see her, to write to her, and to convince her of the fervour of his
love, though he won all her friends over to his interests, though she
heard his praises from morning till night from all who surrounded her,
and though her own heart, perhaps, pleaded more powerfully than all
the rest in his favour; yet she never, for one instant, gave him the
slightest encouragement. Lady Mary’s esteem and affection were so much
increased by these strong proofs of friendship and honour, that
her prejudices yielded; and she at length declared, that if her son
continued, till he was of age, to feel the same attachment for this
amiable girl, she would give her consent to their union. But this, she
added, she promised only on one condition--that her son should abstain
from all attempts, in the interval, to see or correspond with Miss
Sidney, and that he should set out immediately to travel with Mr.
Russell. Transported with love, and joy, and victory, Vivian promised
every thing that was required of him, embraced his mother, and set out
upon his travels.

“Allow,” said he triumphantly to Russell, as the chaise drove from the
door, “allow, my good friend, that you were mistaken, in your fears of
the weakness of my character, and of the yielding facility of my temper.
You see how firm I have been--you see what battle I have made--you see
how I have _stood out_.”

“I never doubted,” said Russell, “your love of your own free will--I
never doubted your fear of being governed, especially by your mother;
but you do not expect that I should allow this to be a proof of strength
of character.”

“What! do you suppose I act from love of my own free will merely?--Do
you call my love for Selina Sidney weakness?--Oh! take care, Russell;
for if once I find you pleading my mother’s cause against your
conscience----”

“You will never find me pleading any cause against my conscience. I have
told your mother, as I have told you, my opinion of Miss Sidney--my firm
opinion--that she is peculiarly calculated to make the happiness of your
life, provided you continue to love her.”

“Provided!--Oh!” cried Vivian, laughing, “spare your musty provisoes, my
dear philosopher! Would not any one think, now, you were an old man of
ninety? If this is all you have to fear, I am happy indeed.”

“At present,” said Russell, calmly, “I have no fear, as I have just
told your mother, but that you should change your mind before you are of
age.”

Vivian grew quite indignant at this suggestion. “You are angry with me,”
 said Russell, “and so was your mother: she was angry because I said, I
_feared,_ instead of I _hoped,_ you would change your mind. Both parties
are angry with me for my sincerity.”

“Sincerity!--no; but I am angry with you for your absurd suspicions of
my constancy.”

“If they are absurd, you need not be angry,” said Russell; “I shall be
well pleased to see their absurdity demonstrated.”

“Then I can demonstrate it this moment.”

“Pardon me; not this moment; you must take time into the account. I make
no doubt but that, at this moment, you are heartily in love with Miss
Sidney; but the thing to be proved is, that your passion will not
decline in force, in proportion as it meets with less resistance. If it
does, you will acknowledge that it was more a love of your own free will
than a love of your mistress that has actuated you, which was the thing
to be proved.”

“Hateful Q.E.D.!” cried Vivian; “you shall see the contrary, and, at
least, I will triumph over you.”

If Russell had ever used art in his management of Vivian’s mind, he
might have been suspected of using it in favour of Miss Sidney at this
instant; for this prophecy of Vivian’s inconstancy was the most likely
means to prevent its accomplishment. Frequently, in the course of their
tour, when Vivian was in any situation where his constancy was tempted,
he recollected Russell’s prediction, and was proud to remind him how
much he had been mistaken. In short, the destined time for their return
home arrived--Vivian presented himself before his mother, and claimed
her promise. She was somewhat surprised, and a little disappointed, by
our hero’s constancy; but she could not retract her word; and, since
her compliance was now unavoidable, she was determined that it should be
gracious. She wrote to Selina, therefore, with great kindness, saying,
that whatever views of other connexions she might formerly have had for
her son, she had now relinquished them, convinced, by the constancy
of her son’s attachment, and by the merit of its object, that his own
choice would most effectually ensure his happiness, and that of all his
friends. Her ladyship added expressions of her regard and esteem, and of
the pleasure she felt in the thoughts of finding in her daughter-in-law
a friend and companion, whose society was peculiarly agreeable to her
taste and suited to her character. This letter entirely dissipated
Selina’s scruples of conscience; Vivian’s love and merit, all his good
and all his agreeable qualities, had now full and unreproved power to
work upon her tender heart. His generous, open temper, his candour,
his warm attachment to his friends, his cultivated understanding,
his brilliant talents, his easy, well-bred, agreeable manners, all
heightened in their power to please by the charm of love, justified,
even in the eyes of the aged and prudent, the passion he inspired.
Selina became extremely attached to him; and she loved with the
delightful belief that there was not, in the mind of her lover, the
seed of a single vice which threatened danger to his virtues or to their
mutual happiness. With his usual candour, he had laid open his whole
character to her, as far as he knew it himself; and had warned her of
that vacillation of temper, that easiness to be led, which Russell
had pointed out as a dangerous fault in his disposition. But of this
propensity Selina had seen no symptoms; on the contrary, the steadiness
of her lover in his attachment to her--the only point on which she had
yet seen him tried--decided her to trust to the persuasive voice of love
and hope, and to believe that Russell’s friendship had in this instance,
been too harsh or too timorous in its forebodings.

Nothing now delayed the marriage of Vivian and Selina but certain legal
rites, which were to be performed on his coming of age. There were certain fines
and recoverie to be suffered, and certain deeds of lease and release to be executed,
before marriage settlements could be drawn;--and the parties were doomed to
wait for the arrival of some trustee who was with his regiment abroad.
All these delays Vivian of course cursed: but, upon the whole, they
were borne by him with heroic patience, and by Selina with all the
tranquillity of confiding love, happy in the present, and not too
anxious for the future.




CHAPTER II.


“My dear Russell,” said Vivian, “love shall not make me forget
friendship; before I marry, I must see you provided for. Believe me,
this was the first--one of the first pleasures I promised myself, in
becoming master of a good fortune. Other thoughts, I confess, have
put it out of my head; so now let me tell you at once. I hate paltry
surprises with my friends: I have, you know--or rather, probably, you do
not know, for you are the most disinterested fellow upon earth--I have
an excellent living in my gift; it shall be yours; consider it as such
from this moment. If I knew a more deserving man, I would give it to
him, upon my honour; so you can’t refuse me. The incumbent can’t live
long; he is an old, very old, infirm man; you’ll have the living in a
year or two, and, in the mean time, stay with me. I ask it as a favour
from a friend, and you see how much I want a friend of your firm
character; and I hope you see, also, how much I can value, in others,
the qualities in which I am myself deficient.”

Russell was much pleased and touched by Vivian’s generous gratitude, and
by the delicacy, as well as kindness of the manner in which he made
this offer; but Russell could not consistently with his feelings or his
principles live in a state of dependent idleness, waiting for a rich
living and the death of an old incumbent. He told Vivian that he had too
much affection for him, and too much respect for himself, ever to run
the hazard of sinking from the rank of an independent friend. After
rallying him, without effect, on his pride, Vivian acknowledged that he
was forced to admire him the more for his spirit. Lady Mary, too, who
was a great and sincere admirer of independence of character, warmly
applauded Mr. Russell, and recommended him, in the highest terms, to a
nobleman in the neighbourhood, who happened to be in want of a preceptor
for his only son. This nobleman was Lord Glistonbury: his lordship was
eager to engage a person of Russell’s reputation for talents; so the
affair was quickly arranged, and Lady Mary Vivian and her son went
to pay a morning visit at Glistonbury Castle, on purpose to accompany
Russell on his first introduction to the family. As they approached the
castle, Vivian was struck with its venerable Gothic appearance; he had
not had a near view of it for some years, and he looked at it with new
eyes. Formerly he had seen it only as a picturesque ornament to the
country; but now that he was himself possessor of an estate in the
vicinity, he considered Glistonbury Castle as a point of comparison
which rendered him dissatisfied with his own mansion. As he drove up
the avenue, and beheld the towers, turrets, battlements, and massive
entrance, his mother, who was a woman of taste, strengthened, by her
exclamations on the beauty of Gothic architecture, the wish that was
rising in his mind to convert his modern house into an _ancient_ castle:
she could not help sighing whilst she reflected that, if her son’s
affections had not been engaged, he might perhaps have obtained the
heart and hand of one of the fair daughters of this castle. Lady
Mary went no farther, even in her inmost thoughts, for she was no double dealer,
no _intrigante_: she had expressed her disappointment and anger warmly and 
openly at first, when she heard of her son's attachment to miss Sidney; but that
young lady's conduct had now won her ladyship's consent to her son's marriage. Incapable of
double-dealing, she resolved never even to let her son know what her
wishes had been with respect to a connexion with the Glistonbury family.
But the very reserve and _discretion_ with which her ladyship spoke--a
reserve unusual with her, and unsuited to the natural warmth of
her manner and temper--might have betrayed her to an acute and cool
observer. Vivian, however, at this instant, was too much intent upon
castle-building to admit any other ideas.

When the carriage drove under the great gateway and stopped, Vivian
exclaimed, “What a fine old castle! how surprised Selina Sidney would
be, how delighted, to see my house metamorphosed into such a castle!”

“It is a magnificent castle, indeed!” said Lady Mary, with a sigh: “I
think there are the Lady Lidhursts on the terrace; and here comes my
Lord Glistonbury with his son.”

“My pupil?” said Russell; “I hope the youth is such as I can become
attached to. Life would be wretched indeed without attachment--of some
sort or other. But I must not expect,” added he, “to find a second time
a friend in a pupil; and such a friend!”

Sentiment, or the expression of the tenderness he felt for his friends,
was so unusual from Russell, that it had double effect; and Vivian was
so much struck by it, that he could scarcely collect his thoughts in
time to speak to Lord Glistonbury, who came to receive his guests,
attended by three _hangers on_ of the family--a chaplain, a captain,
and a young lawyer. His lordship was scarcely past the meridian of life;
yet, in spite of his gay and debonair manner, he looked old, as if he
were paying for the libertinism of his youth by premature decrepitude.
His countenance announced pretensions to ability; his easy and affable
address, and the facility with which he expressed himself, gained him
credit at first for much more understanding than he really possessed.
There was a plausibility in all he said; but, if it were examined,
there was nothing in it but nonsense. Some of his expressions appeared
brilliant; some of his sentiments just; but there was a want of
consistency, a want of a pervading mind in his conversation, which to
good judges betrayed the truth, that all his opinions were adopted, not
formed; all his maxims commonplace; his wit mere repetition; his sense
merely _tact_. After proper thanks and compliments to Lady Mary and
Mr. Vivian, for securing for him such a treasure as Mr. Russell, he
introduced Lord Lidhurst, a sickly, bashful boy of fourteen, to his new
governor, with polite expressions of unbounded confidence, and a rapid
enunciation of undefined and contradictory expectations.

“Mr. Russell will, I am perfectly persuaded, make Lidhurst every
thing we can desire,” said his lordship; “an honour to his country,
an ornament to his family. It is my decided opinion that man is but
a bundle of habits; and it’s my maxim, that education is _second_
nature--_first_, indeed, in many cases. For, except that I am staggered
about original genius, I own I conceive with Hartley, that early
impressions and associations are all in all: his vibrations and
vibratiuncles are quite satisfactory. But what I particularly wish for
Lidhurst, sir, is, that he should be trained as soon as possible into a
statesman. Mr. Vivian, I presume you mean to follow up public business,
and no doubt will make a figure. So I prophesy; and I am used to these
things. And from Lidhurst, too, under similar tuition, I may with reason
expect miracles--‘hope to hear him thundering in the house of commons in
a few years--‘confess ‘am not quite so impatient to have the young dog
in the house of incurables; for you know he could not be there without
being in my shoes, which I have not done with yet--ha! ha! ha!----Each
in his turn, my boy! In the mean time, Lady Mary, shall we join the
ladies yonder, on the terrace? Lady Glistonbury walks so slow, that she
will be seven hours in coming to us; so we had best go to her ladyship:
if the mountain won’t go to Mahomet--you know, of course, what follows.”

On their way to the terrace, Lord Glistonbury, who always heard
himself speak with singular complacency, continued to give his ideas on
education; sometimes appealing to Mr. Russell, sometimes happy to catch
the eye of Lady Mary.

“Now, my idea for Lidhurst is simply this:--that he should know every
thing that is in all the best books in the library, but yet that he
should be the farthest possible from a book-worm--that he should never,
except in a set speech in the house, have the air of having opened a
book in his life--mother-wit for me!--in most cases--and that easy style
of originality, which shows the true gentleman. As to morals--Lidhurst,
walk on, my boy--as to morals, I confess I couldn’t bear to see any
thing of the Joseph Surface about him. A youth of spirit must, you know,
Mr. Vivian--excuse me, Lady Mary, this is--_an aside_--be something of a
latitudinarian to keep in the fashion: not that I mean to say so exactly
to Lidhurst--no, no--on the contrary, Mr. Russell, it is our cue, as
well as this reverend gentleman’s,” looking back at the chaplain, who
bowed assent before he knew to what, “it is our cue, as well as this
reverend gentleman’s, to preach prudence, and temperance, and all the
cardinal virtues.”

“_Cardinal_ virtues! very good, faith! my lord,” said the lawyer,
looking at the clergyman.

“_Temperance!_” repeated the chaplain, winking at the officer; “upon my
soul, my lord, that’s too bad.”

“_Prudence!_” repeated the captain; “that’s too clean a cut at poor
Wicksted, my lord.”

Before his lordship had time to preach any more prudence, they arrived
within bowing distance of the ladies, who had, indeed, advanced at a
very slow rate. Vivian was not acquainted with any of the ladies of the
Glistonbury family; for they had, till this summer, resided at another
of their country seats, in a distant county. His mother had often met
them at parties in town.

Lady Glistonbury was a thin, stiffened, flattened figure--she was
accompanied by two other female forms, one old, the other young; not
each a different grace, but alike all three in angularity, and in a cold
haughtiness of mien. After reconnoitring with their glasses the party
of gentlemen, these ladies quickened their step; and Lady Glistonbury,
making her countenance as affable as it was in its nature to be,
exclaimed, “My dear Lady Mary Vivian! have I the pleasure to see your
ladyship?--They told me it was only visitors to my lord.”

Mr. Vivian had then the honour of being introduced to her ladyship, to
her eldest daughter, Lady Sarah Lidhurst, and to Miss Strictland, the
governess. By all of these ladies he was most graciously received;
but poor Russell was not so fortunate; nothing could be more cold and
repulsive than their reception of him. This did not make Lady Sarah
appear very agreeable to Vivian; he thought her, at this first view, one
of the least attractive young women he had ever beheld.

“Where is my Julia?” inquired Lord Glistonbury. “Ah! there she goes
yonder, all life and spirits.”

Vivian looked as his lordship directed his eye, and saw, at the farthest
end of the terrace, a young girl of about fifteen, running very fast,
with a hoop, which she was keeping up with great dexterity for the
amusement of a little boy who was with her. The governess no sooner saw
this than she went in pursuit of her young ladyship, calling after her,
in various tones and phrases of reprehension, in French, Italian, and
English; and asking whether this was a becoming employment for a young
lady of her age and rank. Heedless of these reproaches, Lady Julia still
ran on, away from her governess, “to chase the rolling circle’s speed,”
 down the slope of the terrace; thither Miss Strictland dared not pursue,
but contented herself with standing on the brink, reiterating her
remonstrances. At length the hoop fell, and the young lady returned, not
to her governess, but, running lightly up the slope of the terrace, to
her surprise, she came full in view of the company before she was aware
that any strangers were there. Her straw hat being at the back of her
head, Lady Glistonbury, with an indignant look, pulled it forwards.

“What a beautiful colour! what a sweet countenance Lady Julia has!”
 whispered Lady Mary Vivian to Lord Glistonbury: at the same time she
could not refrain from glancing her eyes towards her son, to see what
effect was produced upon him. Vivian’s eyes met hers; and this single
look of his mother’s revealed to him all that she had, in her great
prudence, resolved to conceal. He smiled at her, and then at Russell, as
much as to say, “Surely there can be no comparison between such a child
as this and Selina Sidney!”

A few minutes afterwards, in consequence of a sign from Lady
Glistonbury, Julia disappeared with her governess; and the moment was
unnoticed by Vivian, who was then, as his mother observed, looking up at
one of the turrets of the old castle. All its inhabitants were at this
time uninteresting to him, except so far as they regarded his friend
Russell; but the castle itself absorbed his attention. Lord Glistonbury,
charmed to see how he was struck by it, offered to show him over every
part of the edifice; an offer which he and Lady Mary gladly accepted.
Lady Glistonbury excused herself, professing to be unable to sustain
the fatigue: she deputed her eldest daughter to attend Lady Mary in her
stead; and this was the only circumstance which diminished the pleasure
to Vivian, for he was obliged to show due courtesy to this stiff
taciturn damsel at every turn, whilst he was intent upon seeing the
architecture of the castle, and the views from the windows of the towers
and loop-holes of the galleries; all which Lady Sarah pointed out with a
cold, ceremonious civility, and a formal exactness of proceeding, which
enraged Vivian’s enthusiastic temper. The visit ended: he railed half
the time he was going home against their fair, or, as he called her,
their petrified guide; then, full of the Gothic beauties of Glistonbury,
he determined, as soon as possible, to turn his own modern house into
a castle. The very next morning he had an architect to view it, and to
examine its capabilities. It happened that, about this time, several of
the noblemen and gentry, in the county in which Vivian resided, had been
seized with this rage for turning comfortable houses into uninhabitable
castles. And, however perverse or impracticable this retrograde movement
in architecture might seem, there were always at hand professional
projectors, to convince gentlemen that nothing was so feasible. Provided
always that gentlemen approve their estimates as well as their plans,
they undertake to carry buildings back, in a trice, two, or three,
or half a dozen centuries, as may be required, to make them Gothic or
Saracenic, and to “add every grace that time alone can give.” A few days
after Vivian had been at Glistonbury Castle, when Lord Glistonbury came
to return the visit, Russell, who accompanied his lordship, found his
friend encompassed with plans and elevations.

“Surely, my dear Vivian,” said he, seizing the first moment he could
speak to him, “you are not going to spoil this excellent house? It
is completely finished, in handsome modern architecture, perfectly
comfortable and convenient, light, airy, large enough, warm rooms, well
distributed, with ample means of getting at each apartment; and if you
set about to new-model and transform it into a castle, you must, I see,
by your plan, alter the proportions of almost every room, and spoil the
comfort of the whole; turn square to round, and round again to square;
and, worse than all, turn light to darkness--only for the sake of having
what is called a castle, but what has not, in fact, any thing of the
grandeur or solid magnificence of a real ancient edifice. These modern
baby-house miniatures of castles, which gentlemen ruin themselves to
build, are, after all, the most paltry, absurd things imaginable.”

To this Vivian was, after some dispute, forced to agree; but he said,
“that his should not be a baby-house; that he would go to any expense to
make it really magnificent.”

“As magnificent, I suppose, as Glistonbury Castle?”

“If possible:--that is, I confess, the object of my emulation.”

“Ah!” said Russell, shaking his head, “these are the objects of
emulation, for which country gentlemen often ruin themselves; barter
their independence and real respectability; reduce themselves to
distress and disgrace: these are the objects for which they sell either
their estates or their country; become placemen or beggars; and end
either in the liberties of the King’s Bench, or the slaveries of St.
James’s.”

“Impossible for me! you know my public principles,” said Vivian: “and
you know that I think the life of an independent country gentleman the
most respectable of all others--you know my principles.”

“I know your facility,” said Russell: “if you begin by sacrificing thus
to your taste, do you think you will not end by sacrificing to your
interest?”

“Never! never!” cried Vivian.

“Then you imagine that a strong temptation will not act where a weak one
has been found irresistible.”

“Of this I am certain,” said Vivian: “I could never be brought to sell
my country, or to forfeit my honour.”

“Perhaps not,” said Russell: “you might, in your utmost need, have
another alternative; you might forfeit your love; you might give up
Selina Sidney, and marry for money--all for the sake of a castle!”

Struck by this speech, Vivian exclaimed, “I would give up a thousand
castles rather than run such a hazard!”

“Let us then coolly calculate,” said Russell. “What would the castle
cost you?”

The expense, even by the estimates of the architects, which, in
the execution, are usually doubled, was enormous, such as Vivian
acknowledged was unsuited even to his ample fortune. His fortune, though
considerable, was so entailed, that he would, if he exceeded his income,
be soon reduced to difficulties for ready money. But then his mother
had several thousands in the stocks, which she was ready to lend him to
forward this castle-building. It was a project which pleased her taste,
and gratified her aristocratic notions.

Vivian assured his friend at parting, that his reason was convinced:
that he would not yield to the whims of taste, and that he would
prudently give up his folly. So he determined; and he abided by his
determination till he heard numbers speak on the other side of the
question. With Vivian, those who spoke last frequently seemed to speak
best; and, in general, the number of voices overpowered the weight
of argument. By the persuasions of his mother, the example of his
neighbours, and the urgency of architects and men of taste who got about
him soon afterwards, he was convinced that there was no living without
a castle, and that the expense would be _next to nothing at all.
Convinced_, we should not say; for he yielded, against his conviction,
from mere want of power to resist reiterated solicitations. He had
no other motive; for the enthusiasm raised by the view of Glistonbury
Castle had passed away: he plainly saw, what Russell had pointed out to
him, that he should spoil the inside of his house for the sake of the
outside; and, for his own part, he preferred comfort to show. It was
not, therefore, to please his own taste that he ran into this imprudent
expense, but merely to gratify the taste of others.

Now the bustle of building began, and workmen swarmed round his house;
the foundations sank, the scaffolds rose; and many times did Vivian sigh
and repent, when he saw how much was to be undone before any thing could
be done; when he found his house dismantled, saw the good ceilings
and elegant cornices knocked to pieces, saw the light domes and modern
sashes give way; all taken out to be replaced, at profuse expense, by a
clumsy imitation of Gothic; how often did be sigh and calculate, when he
saw the tribes of workmen file off as their dinner bell rang! how often
did he bless himself, when he beheld the huge beams of timber dragged
into his yards, and the solid masses of stone brought from a quarry at
an enormous distance!--Vivian perceived that the expense would be treble
the estimate; and said, that if the thing were to be done again, he
would never consent to it; but now, as Lady Mary observed, it was too
late to repent; and it was, at any rate, best to go on and finish it
with spirit--since it was impossible (nobody knew why) to stop. He
hurried on the workmen with impatience; for he was anxious to have the
roof and some apartments in his castle finished before his marriage. The
dilatoriness of the lawyers, and the want of the trustee, who had not
yet arrived in England, were no longer complained of so grievously by
the lover. Russell, one day, as he saw Vivian overlooking his workmen,
and urging them to expedition, smiled, and asked whether the impatience
of an architect or of a lover was now predominant in his mind. Vivian,
rather offended by the question, replied, that his eagerness to finish
this part of his castle arose from his desire to give an agreeable
surprise to his bride; and he declared that his passion for Selina
was as ardent, at this moment, as it had ever been; but that it was
impossible to make lawyers move faster than their accustomed pace;
and that Miss Sidney was too secure of his affection, and he too well
convinced of hers, to feel that sort of anxiety, which persons who had
less confidence in each other might experience in similar circumstances.
This was all very true, and very reasonable; but Russell could not help
perceiving that Vivian’s language and tone were somewhat altered since
the time when he was ready to brave heaven and earth to marry his
mistress, without license or consent of friends, without the possibility
of waiting a few months till he was of age. In fact, though Vivian would
not allow it, this consent of friends, this ceasing of opposition, this
security and tranquillity of happiness, had considerably changed the
appearance, at least, of his love. Lady Mary perceived it, with a
resolution to say nothing, and see how it would end. Selina did not
perceive it for some time; for she was of a most unsuspicious temper;
and her confidence in Vivian was equal to the fondness of her love. She
began to think, indeed, that the lawyers were provokingly slow; and when
Vivian did not blame them as much as he used to do, she only thought
that he understood business better than she did--besides, the necessary
trustee was not come--and, in short, the last thing that occurred to her
mind was to blame Vivian.

The trustee at length arrived, and the castle was almost in the
wished-for state of forwardness, when a new cause of delay arose--a
county election: but how this election was brought on, and how it was
conducted, it is necessary to record. It happened that a relation of
Vivian’s was appointed to a new seventy-four gun ship, of which he came
to take the command at Plymouth, which was within a few miles of him.
Vivian recollected that Russell had often expressed a desire to go on
board a man-of-war. Vivian, therefore, after having appointed a day
for their going, went to Glistonbury to invite Russell: his pupil, Lord
Lidhurst, begged to be permitted to accompany them: and Lady Julia,
the moment she heard of this new seventy-four gun ship, was, as her
governess expressed it, wild to be of the party. Indeed, any thing
that had the name of a party of pleasure, and that promised a transient
relief from the tedious monotony in which her days passed; any thing
that gave a chance of even a few hours’ release from the bondage
in which she was held between the restraints of the most rigid of
governesses and the proudest of mothers, appeared delightful to this
lively and childish girl. She persecuted her governess with entreaties,
till at last she made Miss Strictland go with her petition to Lady
Glistonbury; whilst, in the mean time, Lady Julia overwhelmed her father
with caresses, till he consented; and with much difficulty, prevailed
upon Lady Glistonbury to give her permission for the young ladies to go
with their governess, their brother, their father, and Lady Mary Vivian,
on this excursion. The invitation was now extended to all the company
then at the castle; including the representative of the county, who,
being just threatened with a fit of the gout, brought on by hard
drinking at the last election, expressed some reluctance to going with
this party on the water. But this gentleman was now paying his humble
devoirs to the Lady Sarah Lidhurst; and it was represented to him, by
all who understood the ground, that he would give mortal offence if he
did not go; so it was ruled, that, hot or cold, gout or no gout, he
must appear in the Lady Sarah’s train: he submitted to this perilous
necessity in the most gallant manner. The day proved tolerably
fine--Vivian had an elegant entertainment provided for the
company, under a marquee pitched on the shore--they _embarked_ in a
pleasure-boat--Lady Sarah was very sick, and her admirer very cold; but
Lady Julia was in extasies at every thing she saw and felt--she feared
nothing, found nothing inconvenient--was charmed to be drawn so easily
from the boat up the high side of the ship--charmed to find herself on
deck--charmed to see the sails, the ropes, the rigging, the waves, the
sea, the sun, the clouds, the sailors, the cook dressing dinner--all,
all indiscriminately charmed her; and, like a school-girl broke loose,
she ran about, wild with spirits, asking questions, some sensible, some
silly; laughing at her own folly, flying from this side to that, from
one end of the ship to the other, down the ladders and up again; whilst
Mr. Russell, who was deputed to take care of her, could scarcely keep
up with her: Lord Glistonbury stood by, holding his sides and laughing
aloud: Miss Strictland, quite disabled by the smell of the ship, was
lying on a bed in the state cabin; and Lady Sarah, all the time shaded
by an umbrella held by her shivering admirer, sat, as if chained upright
in her chair of state, upon deck, scorning her sister’s childish levity,
and proving herself, with all due propriety, incapable of being moved to
surprise or admiration by any object on land or sea.

Lady Mary Vivian, while she observed with a quick eye all that passed,
and read her son’s thoughts, was fully persuaded that neither of the
Lady Lidhursts would be likely to suit his taste, even if his affections
were disengaged: the one was too childish, the other too stiff. “Yet
their birth and connexions, and their consequence in the county,”
 thought Lady Mary, “would have made their alliance highly desirable.”
 Every body seemed weary at the close of this day’s entertainment, except
Lady Julia, who _kept it up_ with indefatigable gaiety, and could hardly
believe that it was time to go home, when the boat was announced to row
them to shore: heedless, and absolutely dizzy with talking and laughing,
her ladyship, escaping from the assistance of sailors and gentlemen,
made a false step in getting into the boat, and, falling over, would
have sunk for ever, but for Mr. Russell’s presence of mind. He
seized her with a strong grasp, and saved her. The fright sobered her
completely; and she sat wrapped in great-coats, as silent, as tractable,
and as wet as possible, during the remainder of the way to shore. The
screams, the ejaculations, the reprimands from Miss Strictland; the
questions, the reflections, to which this incident led, may possibly be
conceived, but cannot be enumerated.

This event, however alarming at the moment, had no serious consequence;
for Lady Julia caught neither fever nor cold, though Miss Strictland
was morally certain her ladyship would have one or the other; indeed she
insinuated, that her ladyship deserved to have both. Lady Sarah’s poor
shivering knight of the shire, however, did not escape so well. Obliged
to row home, in a damp evening, without his great-coat, which he had
been forced to offer to Lady Julia, in a pleasure-boat, when he should
have been in flannels or in bed, he had “cause to rue the boating of
that day.” His usual panacea of the gout did not come as expected, _to
set him up again_. The cold he caught this day killed him. Lady Sarah
Lidhurst was precisely as sorry as decorum required. But the bustle of a
new election was soon to obliterate the memory of the old member, in
the minds of his numerous friends. Lord Glistonbury, and several other
voices in the county, called upon Vivian to stand on the independent
interest. There was to be a contest: for a government candidate declared
himself at the same moment that application was made to Vivian. The
expense of a contested election alarmed both Vivian and his mother.
Gratified as she was by the honour of this offer, yet she had
the prudence to advise her son rather to go into parliament as
representative for a borough than to hazard the expense of a contest
for the county. Miss Sidney, also, whom he consulted upon this occasion,
supported his mother’s prudent advice, in the most earnest manner; and
Vivian was inclined to follow this counsel, till Lord Glistonbury came
one morning to plead the contrary side of the question: he assured
Vivian, that from his experience of the county, he was morally certain
they should carry it without trouble, and with no expense _worth
mentioning_. These were only general phrases, to be sure, not arguments;
but these, joined to her ambition to see her son member for the county,
at length overpowered Lady Mary’s better judgment: her urgent entreaties
were now joined to those of Lord Glistonbury, and of many loud-tongued
electioneerers, who proved to Vivian, by every thing but calculation,
that he must be returned if he would but stand--if he would only declare
himself. Russell and his own prudence strongly counselled him to resist
these clamorous importunities; the two preceding candidates, whose
fortunes had been nearly as good as his, had been ruined by the
contests. Vivian was very young, but just of age; and Russell observed,
“that it would be better for him to see something more of the world,
before he should embark in politics, and plunge into public business.”
 “True,” said Vivian; “but Mr. Pitt was only three-and-twenty when he was
minister of England. I am not ambitious; but I should certainly like to
distinguish myself, if I could; and whilst I feel in youth the glow of
patriotism, why should I not serve my country?”

“Serve it and welcome,” said Russell: “but don’t begin by ruining
yourself by a contested election; or else, whatever glow of patriotism
you may feel, it will be out of your power to be an honest member of
parliament. If you must go into parliament immediately for the good
of your country, go in as member for some borough, which will not ruin
you.”

“But the committee of our friends will be so disappointed if I decline;
and my mother, who has now set her heart upon it, and Lord Glistonbury,
and Mr. C----, and Mr. G----, and Mr. D----, who are such zealous
friends, and who urge me so much----”

“Judge for yourself,” said Russell, “and don’t let any persons who
happen to be near you persuade you to see with their eyes, and decide
with their wishes. Zealous friends, indeed!--because they love to
make themselves of consequence, by bawling and scampering about at an
election!--And you would let such people draw you on, to ruin yourself.”

“I will show you that they shall not,” cried Vivian, seizing a sheet
of paper, and sitting down immediately to write the copy of a circular
letter to his friends, informing them, with many thanks, that he
declined to stand for the county. Russell eagerly wrote copies of this
letter, which Vivian declared should be sent early the next morning.
But no sooner was Russell out of sight than Lady Mary Vivian resumed her
arguments in favour of commencing his canvass immediately, and before
his friends should cool. When she saw the letters that he had been
writing, she was excessively indignant; and, by a torrent of female and
maternal eloquence, he was absolutely overwhelmed. Auxiliaries poured
in to her ladyship on all sides; horsemen after horsemen, freeholders
of all degrees, now flocked to the house, hearing that Mr. Vivian had
thoughts of standing for the county. They were unanimously loud in their
assurances of success. Old and new copies of poll books were produced,
and the different interests of the county counted and recounted,
balanced and counterbalanced, again and again, by each person, after his
own fashion: and it was proved to Mr. Vivian, _in black and white, and
as plain as figures could make it_, that he had the game in his own
hands; and that, if he would but declare himself, the other candidate
would, the very next day, they would be bound for it, decline the
contest. Vivian had a clear head, and a competent knowledge of
arithmetic; he saw the fallacies and inaccuracies in their modes of
computation; he saw, upon examining the books, that the state of
the county interests was very different from what they pretended or
believed; and he was convinced that the opposite candidate would not
decline: but after Vivian had stated these reasons ten times, and his
mother and his electioneering partisans had reiterated their assertions
twenty times, he yielded, merely because they had said twice as much
as he had, and because, poor easy man! he had not power to resist
continuity of solicitation.

He declared himself candidate for the county; and was soon immersed in
all the toil, trouble, vexation, and expense, of a contested election.
Of course, his marriage was now to be postponed till the election should
be over. Love and county politics have little affinity. What the evils
of a contested election are can be fully known only to those by whom
they have been personally experienced. The contest was bitter. The
Glistonbury interest was the strongest which supported Vivian: Lord
Glistonbury and _his lordship’s friends_ were warm in his cause. Not
that they had any particular regard for Vivian; but he was to be _their
member_, opposed to the court candidate, whom his lordship was anxious
to keep out of the county. Lord Glistonbury had once been a strong
friend to government, and was thought a confirmed courtier, especially
as he had been brought up in high aristocratic notions; but he had
made it his great object to turn his earldom into a marquisate; and
government having delayed or refused to gratify him in this point,
he quitted them with disgust, and set up his standard amongst the
opposition. He was now loud and zealous on every occasion that could,
as he said, _annoy_ government; and merely because he could not be a
marquis, he became a patriot. Mistaken, abused name! how glorious in
its original, how despicable in its debased signification!--Lord
Glistonbury’s exertions were indefatigable.

Vivian felt much gratitude for this apparently disinterested friendship;
and, during a few weeks, whilst this canvass was going on, he formed
a degree of intimacy with the Glistonbury family, which, in any other
circumstances, could scarcely have been brought about during months
or years. An election, in England, seems, for the time, to level all
distinctions, not only of rank, but even of pride: Lady Glistonbury
herself, at this season, found it necessary to relax from her usual
rigidity.--There was an extraordinary freedom of egress and regress; and
the haughty code of Glistonbury lay dormant. Vivian, of course, was the
centre of all interest; and, whenever he appeared, every individual of
the family was eager to inquire, “What news?--What news?--How do things
go on to-day?--How will the election turn out?--Have you written to Mr.
Such-a-one?--Have you been to Mr. Such-a-one’s?--I’ll write a note for
you--I’ll copy a letter.”--There was one common cause--Miss Strictland
even deigned to assist Mr. Vivian, and to try her awkward hand to
forward his canvass, for it was to support the Glistonbury interest; and
“there was no impropriety could attach to the thing.” Russell’s extreme
anxiety made Vivian call more frequently even than it was necessary at
the castle, to quiet his apprehensions, and to assure him that things
were going on well. Young Lord Lidhurst, who was really good-natured,
and over whose mind Russell began to gain some ascendancy, used to stand
upon the watch for Vivian’s appearance, and would run up the back stairs
to Russell’s apartment, to give him notice of it, and to be the first
to tell the news. Lady Sarah--the icy lady Sarah herself--began to
thaw; and every day, in the same phrase, she condescended to say to
Mr. Vivian, that she “hoped the poll was going on as well as could be
expected.” It was, of course, reported, that Vivian was to succeed the
late representative of the county in all its honours. In eight days he
was confidently given to Lady Sarah by the generous public; and the day
of their nuptials was positively fixed. As the lady was, even by the
account of her friends, two or three years older than Mr. Vivian,
and four or five years older by her looks, and as she was peculiarly
unsuited to his taste, he heard the report without the slightest
apprehension for his own constancy to Selina. He laughed at the idea, as
an excellent joke, when it was first mentioned to him by Russell. Lord
Glistonbury’s manners, however, and the cordial familiarity with which
he treated Vivian, gave every day increasing credit to the report. “If
he were his son, my lord could not be more anxious about Mr. Vivian,”
 said one of the plain-spoken freeholders, in the presence of the Lady
Lidhursts.--Lady Sarah pursed up her mouth, and threw back her head; but
Lady Julia, archly looking at her sister, smiled. The vivacity of Lady
Julia’s manner did not appear excessive during this election time, when
all the world seemed mad; on the contrary, there was, in her utmost
freedom and raillery, that air of good-breeding and politeness, in which
vulgar mirth and liberty are always deficient. Vivian began to think
that she was become less childish, and that there was something of
a mixture of womanish timidity in her appearance, which rendered her
infinitely more attractive. One evening, in particular, when her father
having sent her for her morning’s work, she returned with a basket full
of _the Vivian cockade_, which she had made with her own delicate hands,
Vivian thought she looked “very pretty:” her father desired her to give
them to the person for whom they were intended, and she presented them
to Mr. Russell, saying, “They are for your friend, sir.”--Vivian thought
she looked “very graceful.”--Lady Mary Vivian suppressed half a sigh,
and thought she kept the whole of her mind to herself. These happy days
of canvassing, and this _freedom of election_, could not last for ever.
After polling the county to the last freeholder, the contest was at
length decided, and Vivian was declared duly elected. He was chaired,
and he scattered money with a lavish hand, as he passed over the heads
of the huzzaing populace; and he had all the honours of an election: the
horses were taken from his carriage, and he was drawn by men, who were
soon afterwards so much intoxicated, that they retained no vestige of
rationality. Not only the inferior, but the superior rank of electors,
as usual upon such occasions, thought proper to do honour to their
choice, and to their powers of judgment, by drinking their member’s
health at the expense of their own, till they could neither see, hear,
nor understand. Our hero was not by any means fond of drinking, but he
could not refuse to do as others did; and Lord Glistonbury swore, that
now he had found out that Vivian could be such a pleasant companion over
a bottle, he should never listen to his excuses in future.

A few days after this election, parliament met for the dispatch of
business; and as some important question was to come on, all the members
were summoned, by a peremptory call of the house. Vivian was obliged
to go to town immediately, and compelled to defer his marriage. He
regretted being thus hurried away from Selina; and with a thousand
tender and passionate expressions, assured her, that the moment his
attendance on public business could be spared, he should hasten to the
country to claim his promised happiness. The castle would be finished
by the time the session was over; the lawyers would also have completed
their settlements; and Vivian said he should make every other necessary
preparation whilst he was in town: therefore he urged Selina now to
fix the time for their marriage, and to let it be the first week of the
recess of parliament. But Miss Sidney, who had great delicacy of feeling
and dignity of character, thought that Vivian had of late shown some
symptoms of decreased affection, and that he had betrayed signs of
unsteadiness of character. In the whole affair of the castle-building
and of the election, he had evidently been led by others instead of
following his own conviction:--she wisely dreaded that he might, in more
important actions, yield his judgment to others; and then what security
could she have for his principles? He might, perhaps, be led into all
sorts of fashionable dissipation and vice. Besides these fears, she
considered that Vivian was the possessor of a large fortune; that his
mother had with difficulty consented to this match; that he was very
young, had seen but little of the world, and might, perhaps, in future,
repent of having made, thus early in life, a _love match_. She therefore
absolutely refused to let him now bind himself to her by any fresh
promises. She desired that he should consider himself as perfectly
at liberty, and released from all engagement to her. It was evident,
however, from the manner in which she spoke that she wished to restore
her lover’s liberty for his sake only; and that her own feelings,
however they might be suppressed, were unchanged. Vivian was touched and
charmed by her delicacy and generosity: in the fervour of his feelings
he swore that his affections could never change; and he believed what he
swore. Lady Mary Vivian was struck, also, with Miss Sidney’s conduct
at parting; and she acknowledged that it was impossible to show at once
more tenderness and dignity. No one, however, not even Vivian, knew how
much pain this separation gave Selina. Her good sense and prudence told
her indeed, that it was best, both for her happiness and Vivian’s, that
he should see something more of the world, and that she should have some
farther proof of the steadiness of his attachment, before she should
unite herself with him irrevocably: but whilst she endeavoured to
fortify her mind with these reflections, love inspired many painful
fears; and, though she never repented having set him free from his
promises and engagements, she trembled for the consequences of his being
thus at liberty, in such scenes of temptation as a London life would
present.

'My dear,' said Mrs Sidney to her daughter, 'the session will soon be over;
I am sure it will be a very short one. And there is not the least danger -- especially
after your having behaved so nobly -- there is not the least danger, that Vivian's
heart can change. No, nor his conduct in any respect; for, though his fortune
and situation may put him in the way of dissipated companions, yet he has
such good principles, and such an excellent disposition, that I feel quite secure
of him.'

'But then he is so easily led,' said Selina.

'That's true, my dear. But you will find, that he will never be led to
do anything wrong. I wish,' as Mr. Russell says, 'he had not been persuaded
to build this expensive castle, and to go into all the expense of this
contested election; however, there's nothing wrong in all this. Every
young man, who comes early into possession of a large fortune, squanders
away money on some folly or other; and there's no reason to fear, because
he was overpersuaded in these cases, which were mere matters of taste and
opinion, that he should yield to the example or entreaties of others where
principle is concerned; depend upon it, my dear, he will return to us
worthy of you. There is no preservative, for a young man, better than an
attachment to an amiable woman.'

'I suppose this call of the house must take lord Glistonbury to town', said
Selina: 'I wish I knew whether all the family go with him?'--


CHAPTER III.


When our hero arrived in London, and when he was first introduced into
fashionable society, his thoughts were so intent upon Selina Sidney,
that he was in no danger of plunging into dissipation. He was surprised
at the eagerness with which some young men pursued frivolous pleasures:
he was still more astonished at seeing the apathy in which others of his
own age were sunk, and the listless insignificance in which they lounged
away their lives.

The call of the house, which brought Vivian to town, brought Lord
Glistonbury also to attend his duty in the house of peers: with his
lordship’s family came Mr. Russell, whom Vivian went to see, as soon and
as often as he could. Russell heard, with satisfaction, the indignant
eloquence with which his friend spoke; and only wished that these
sentiments might last, and that fashion might never lead him to imitate
or to tolerate fools, whom he now despised.

“In the mean time, tell me how you go on yourself,” said Vivian; “how
do you like your situation here, and your pupil, and all the Glistonbury
family? Let me behind the scenes at once; for, you know, I see them only
on the stage.”

Russell replied, in general terms, that he had hopes Lord Lidhurst would
turn out well, and that therefore he was satisfied with his situation;
but avoided entering into particulars, because he was a confidential
person in the family. He thought that a preceptor and a physician
were, in some respects, bound, by a similar species of honour, to speak
cautiously of the maladies of their patients, or the faults of their
pupils. Admitted into the secrets of families, they should never make
use of the confidence reposed in them, to the disadvantage of any by
whom they are trusted. Russell’s strictly honourable reserve upon this
occasion was rather provoking to Vivian, who, to all his questions,
could obtain only the dry answer of--“Judge for yourself.”--The nature
of a town life, and the sort of intercourse which capital cities afford,
put this very little in Vivian’s power. The obligations he was under to
Lord Glistonbury for assistance at the election made him anxious to show
his lordship respect and attention; and the sort of intimacy which that
election had brought on was, to a certain degree, kept up in town. Lady
Mary Vivian was constantly one at Lady Glistonbury’s card parties;
and Vivian was frequently at his lordship’s dinners. Considering
the coldness and formality of Lady Glistonbury’s manners, she was
particularly attentive to Lady Mary Vivian; and our hero was continually
an attendant upon the ladies of the Glistonbury family to all public
places. This was by no means disagreeable to him, as they were persons
of _high consideration_; and they were sure of drawing into their circle
the very best company. Lady Mary Vivian observed that it was a great
advantage to her son to have such a house as Lord Glistonbury’s open to
him, to go to whenever he pleased. Besides the advantage to his morals,
her ladyship was by no means insensible to the gratification her pride
received from her son’s living in such high company. The report which
had been raised in the country during the election, that Mr. Vivian was
going to be married to Lady Sarah Lidhurst, now began to circulate
in town. This was not surprising, since a young man in London, of any
fortune or notoriety, can hardly dance three or four times successively
with the same young lady, cannot even sit beside her, and converse with
her in public half a dozen times, without its being reported that he
is going to be married to her. Of this, Vivian, during his noviciate in
town, was not perhaps sufficiently aware: he was soon surprised at being
asked, by almost every one he met, when his marriage with Lady Sarah
Lidhurst was to take place. At first he contented himself with laughing
at these questions, and declaring that there was no truth in the report:
but his asseverations were not to be believed; they were attributed to
motives of discretion: he was told by his companions, that he kept his
own counsel very well; but they all knew _the thing was to be_: he was
congratulated upon his good fortune in making such an excellent match;
for though, as they said, he would have but little money with Lady
Sarah, yet the connexion was so great, that he was the luckiest fellow
upon earth. The degree of importance which the report gave him among
the young men of his acquaintance, and the envy he excited, amused
and gratified his vanity. The sort of conversation he was now in the
constant habit of hearing, both from young and old, in all companies,
about the marriages of people in the fashionable world, where fortune,
and rank, and _connexion_, were always the first things spoken of or
considered, began insensibly to influence Vivian’s mode of speaking, if
not of judging. Before he mixed in this society, he knew perfectly
well that these were the principles by which _people of the world_ are
guided; but whilst he had believed this only on hearsay, it had not
appeared to him so entirely true and so important as when he saw and
heard it himself. The effect of the opinions of a set of fine people,
now he was actually in their society, and whilst all other society
was excluded from his perception, was very different from what he had
imagined it might be, when he was in the country or at college. To do
our hero justice, however, he was sensible of this _aberration_ in his
own mind, he had sense enough to perceive from what causes it arose, and
steadiness sufficient to adhere to the judgements he had previously and
deliberately formed. He did not in material points change his opinion of
his mistress; he thought her far, far superior to all he saw and heard
amongst the belles who were most admired in the fashionable world; but,
at the same time, he began to agree with his mother’s former wish, that
Selina, added to all other merits, had the advantage of high birth
and connexions, or at least, of belonging to a certain class of high
company. He determined that, as soon as she should be his wife, he would
have her introduced to the very _first society_ in town: he pleased
his imagination with anticipating the change that would be made in
her appearance, by the addition of certain elegancies of the mode:
he delighted in thinking of the sensation she would produce, and the
respect that would be paid to her as Mrs. Vivian, surrounded as he would
take care that she should be, with all those external signs of wealth
and fashion, which command immediate and universal homage from the great
and little world.

One day, when Vivian was absorbed in these pleasing reveries, Russell
startled him with this question: “When are you to be married to Lady
Sarah Lidhurst?”

“From you such a question!” said Vivian.

“Why not from me? It is a question that every body asks of me, because
I am your intimate friend; and I should really be obliged to you, if
you would furnish me with an answer, that may give me an air of a little
more consequence than that which I have at present, being forced to
answer, ‘I don’t know.’”

“You don’t know! but why do not you answer, ‘Never!’ as I do,” said
Vivian, “to all the fools who ask me the same question?”

“Because they say that is your answer, and only _a come off_.”

“I can’t help it--Is it my fault if they won’t believe the truth?”

“Why, people are apt to trust to appearances in these cases; and if
appearances are contrary to your assertions, you should not wonder that
you are not believed.”

“Well, time will show them their mistake!” said Vivian.--“But I don’t
know what appearances you mean.--What appearances are against me?--I
never in my life saw a woman I was less disposed to like--whom it would
be more impossible for me to love--than Lady Sarah Lidhurst; and I am
sure I never gave her, or any of her family, the least reason to imagine
I had a thought of her.”

“Very likely; yet you are at Lord Glistonbury’s continually, and you
attend her ladyship to all public places. Is this the way, do you think,
to put a stop to the report that has been raised?”

“I care not whether it stops or goes on,” said Vivian.--“How!--Don’t I
know it is false?--That’s enough for me.”

“It may embarrass you yet,” said Russell.

“Good Heavens!--Can you, who know me so well, Russell, fancy me so weak
as to be embarrassed by such a report? Look--I would rather put this
hand into that fire and let it be burned off, than offer it to Lady
Sarah Lidhurst.”

“Very likely.--I don’t doubt you think so,” said Russell.

“And I would do so,” said Vivian.

“Possibly.--Yet you might be embarrassed nevertheless, if you found that
you had raised expectations which you could not fulfil; and if you found
yourself accused of having jilted this lady, if all her friends were to
say you had used her very ill.--I know your nature, Vivian; these things
would disquiet you very much: and is it not better to prevent them?”

“But neither Lady Sarah nor her friends blame me: I see no signs in the
family of any of the thoughts or feelings you suppose.”

“Ladies--especially young and fashionable ladies--do not always show
their thoughts or feelings,” said Russell.

“Lady Sarah Lidhurst has no thoughts or feelings,” said Vivian, “any
more than an automaton. I’ll answer for her--I am sure I can do her the
justice to proclaim, that she has always, from the first moment I
saw her till this instant, conducted herself towards me with the same
petrified and petrifying propriety.”

“I do not know what _petrified propriety_ exactly means,” said Russell:
“but let it mean what it may, it is nothing to the present purpose;
for the question is not about the propriety of Lady Sarah Lidhurst’s
conduct, but of yours. Now, allowing you to call her ladyship a
petrifaction, or an automaton, or by whatever other name you please,
still, I apprehend, that she is in reality a human creature, and a
woman; and I conceive it is the duty of a man of honour or honesty not
to deceive her.”

“I would not deceive her, or any woman living, upon any account,” said
Vivian. “But how is it possible I can deceive her, when I tell you I
never said a word about love or gallantry, or any thing like it, to her
in my life?”

“But you know language is conventional, especially in gallantry,” said
Russell.

“True; but I’ll swear the language of my looks has been unequivocal, if
that is what you mean.”

“Not exactly: there are certain signs by which the world JUDGES in these
cases--if a gentleman is seen often with the same lady in public.”

“Absurd, troublesome, ridiculous signs, which would put a stop to all
society; which would prevent a man from conversing with a woman,
either in public or private; and must absolutely preclude one sex from
obtaining any real knowledge of the characters and dispositions of the
other.”

“I admit all you say--I feel the truth of it--I wish this were changed
in society; it is a great inconvenience, a real evil,” said Russell:
“but an individual cannot alter a custom; and, as you have not, by
your own account, any particular interest in becoming more intimately
acquainted with the character and disposition of Lady Sarah Lidhurst,
you will do well not to expose yourself to any inconvenience on her
account, by neglecting common received forms and opinions.”

“Well! well!--say no more about it,” said Vivian, impatiently; “spare me
all farther logic and morality upon this subject, and I’ll do what you
please--only tell me what you would have me do.”

“Gradually withdraw yourself for some time from this house, and the
report will die away of itself.”

“Withdraw myself!--that would be very hard upon me!” cried Vivian; “for
this house is the most agreeable house in town to me;--because you live
in it, in the first place; and then, though the women are as stiff as
pokers, one is always sure of meeting all the pleasant and clever men
at Glistonbury’s good dinner. Let me tell you, good dinners, and good
company, and good conversation, and good music, make altogether a very
pleasant house, which I should be confoundedly sorry to be forced to
give up.”

“I don’t doubt it,” said Russell; “but we must often give up more even
than this for the sake of acting with consistency and honour; we must
sacrifice the less to the greater good; and it is on these occasions
that people show strength or weakness of mind.”

Vivian felt the justice of his friend’s observations--resolved to follow
his advice--and to withdraw himself gradually from the Glistonbury
circle. He had not, however, steadiness enough to persist in this
resolution; one engagement linked on another; and he would soon,
probably, have relapsed into his habit of being continually of their
parties, if accident had not for a time suspended this intimacy, by
leading him into another, which seemed to him still more attractive.

Among the men of talents and political consequence whom he met at Lord
Glistonbury’s was Mr. Wharton, whose conversation particularly pleased
Vivian, and who now courted his acquaintance with an eagerness which was
peculiarly flattering. Vivian knew him only as a man of great abilities;
with his real character he was not acquainted. Wharton had prepossessing
manners, and wit sufficient whenever he pleased to make the worse appear
the better reason. In private or in public debate he had at his command,
and could condescend to employ, all sorts of arms, and every possible
mode of annoyance, from the most powerful artillery of logic to the
lowest squib of humour. He was as little nice in the company he kept as
in the style of his conversation. Frequently associating with fools,
and willing even to be thought one, he made alternately his sport
and advantage of the weakness and follies of mankind. Wharton was
philosophically, politically, and fashionably profligate. After
having ruined his private fortune by unbounded extravagance, he lived
on--nobody knew how--in careless profusion. In public life he made a
distinguished figure; and seemed, therefore, to think himself raised
above the necessity of practising any of the minor virtues of economy,
prudence, or justice, which common people find essential to their
well-being in society. Far from attempting to conceal, he gloried in
his faults; for he knew full well, that as long as he had the voice of
numbers with him, he could bully, or laugh, or shame plain reason and
rigid principle out of countenance. It was his grand art to represent
good sense as stupidity, and virtue as hypocrisy. Hypocrisy was, in his
opinion, the only vice which merited the brand of infamy; and from this
he took sufficient care to prove, or at least to proclaim, himself free.
Even whilst he offended against the decencies of life, there seemed
to be something frank and graceful in his manner of throwing aside all
disguise. There appeared an air of superior liberality in his avowing
himself to be governed by that absolute selfishness, which other men
strive to conceal even from their own hearts. He dexterously led his
acquaintance to infer that he would prove as much better than his
professions, as other people are often found to be worse than theirs.
Where he wished to please, it was scarcely possible to escape the
fascination of his manner; nor did he neglect any mode of courting
popularity. He knew that a good table is necessary to attract even men
of wit; and he made it a point to have the very best cook, and the very
best wines. He paid his cook, and his cook was the only person he did
pay, in ready money. His wine-merchant he paid in words--an art in which
he was a professed and yet a successful adept, as hundreds of living
witnesses were ready to attest. But though Wharton could cajole, he
could not attach his fellow-creatures--he had a party, but no friend.
With this distribution of things he was perfectly satisfied; for he
considered men only as beings who were to be worked to his purposes; and
he declared that, provided he had power over their interests and their
humours, he cared not what became of their hearts. It was his policy
to enlist young men of talents or fortune under his banners; and
consequently Vivian was an object worthy of his attention. Such was
the disorder of Wharton’s affairs, that either ready money or political
power was necessary to his existence. Our hero could, at the same time,
supply his extravagance and increase his consequence. Wharton thought
that he could borrow money from Vivian, and that he might command his
vote in parliament; but, to the accomplishment of these schemes, there
were two obstacles--Vivian was attached to an amiable woman, and was
possessed of an estimable friend. Wharton had become acquainted with
Russell at Lord Glistonbury’s; and, in many arguments which they had
held on public affairs, had discovered that Russell was not a man who
ever preferred the expedient to the right, nor one who could be bullied
or laughed out of his principles. He saw also that Russell’s influence
over Vivian was so great, that it supplied him with that strength of
mind in which Vivian was naturally deficient; and, if our hero should
marry such a woman as Miss Sidney, Wharton foresaw that he should have
no chance of succeeding in his designs; therefore his first objects
were, to detach Vivian from his friend Russell and from Selina. One
morning he called upon Vivian with a party of his friends, and found him
writing.

“Poetry!” cried Wharton, carelessly looking at what he had, been
writing, “poetry, I protest!--Ay, I know this poor fellow’s in love;
and every man who is in love is a poet, ‘with a woeful ditty to his
mistress’s eyebrow.’ Pray what colour may Miss Sidney’s eyebrows
be?--she is really a pretty girl--I think I remember seeing her at some
races.--Why does she never come to town?--But of course she is not to
blame for that, but her fortune I suppose.--Marrying a girl without a
fortune is a serious thing in these expensive days; but you have fortune
enough for both yourself and your wife, so you may do as you please.
Well, I thank God, I have no fortune! If I had been a young man of
fortune I should have been the most unhappy rascal upon earth, for I
should have always suspected that every woman liked me for my wealth--I
should have had no pleasure in the smiles of an angel--angels, or their
mothers, are so venal now-a-days, and so fond of the pomps and vanities
of this wicked world!”

“I hope,” said Vivian, laughing, “you don’t include the whole sex in
your satire.”

“No--there are exceptions--and every man has his angel of an exception,
as every woman has her star:--it is well for weak women when these stars
of theirs don’t lead them astray; and well for weak men when these
angel exceptions before marriage don’t turn out very women or devils
afterwards. But why do I say all this? because I am a suspicious
scoundrel--I know and can’t help it. If other fellows of my standing in
this wicked world would but speak the truth, however, they would show
as much suspicion and more than I do. Bad as I am, and such as I am,
you see, and have the whole of me--nobody can say Wharton’s a hypocrite;
that’s some comfort. But, seriously, Vivian, I don’t mean to laugh at
love and angels--I can just remember the time when I felt all your
sort of romance--but that is in the preterpluperfect tense with
me--completely past--ambition is no bad cure for love. My head is, at
this present moment, so full of this new bill that we are bringing into
parliament, that Cupid might empty his quiver upon me in vain.--Look!
here is an impenetrable shield!” added he, wrapping round him a thick
printed copy of an act of parliament. “Come, Vivian, you must come along
with us to the house,

     ‘And, mix’d with men, a man you must appear.’”

Vivian felt much ashamed of having been detected in writing a sonnet,
especially as it afforded Wharton such a fine subject for raillery.
He accompanied the party to the House of Commons, where Wharton made a
brilliant speech. It gained universal applause. Vivian sympathized in
the general enthusiasm of admiration for Wharton’s talents, accepted
an invitation to sup with him, and was charmed by his convivial powers.
From this day, he grew every hour more intimate with Wharton.

“I can enjoy,” thought Vivian, “the pleasure of his society without
being influenced by his libertine example.”

Lady Mary Vivian saw the rise and progress of this intimacy, and was
not insensible to its danger; yet she was gratified by seeing her son
distinguished by a man of Wharton’s political consequence; and she
satisfied her conscience by saying, “He will bring my son forward in
public life; and, as to the rest, Charles has too good principles ever
to follow his example in private life.”

Wharton had too much address to alarm Vivian’s moral prejudices on
a first acquaintance. He contented himself with ridiculing only the
exaggeration of any of the virtues, still affecting to believe in
virtue, and to love it, wherever it could be found genuine. By the
success of his first petty attacks, he learned the power that ridicule
had over our hero’s mind; and he did not fail to make use of it
continually. After having, as he perceived, succeeded in making Vivian
ashamed of his sonnet to Selina, and of appearing as a romantic lover,
he doubted not but in time he should make _true_ love itself ridiculous;
and Wharton thought it was now the moment to hazard another stroke, and
to commence his attack against friendship.

“Vivian, my good fellow! why do you let yourself be ruled by that modern
stoic in the form of Lord Lidhurst’s tutor? I never saw any of these
cold moralists who were real, warm-hearted, good friends. I have a
notion I see more of Russell’s play in the house where he has got than
he thinks I do; and I can form a shrewd guess why he was so zealous in
warning you of the report about Lady Sarah Lidhurst--he had his own
snug reasons for wanting you away--Oh, trust me for scenting out
self-interest, through all the doublings and windings of your cunning
moralist!”

Reddening with indignation at this attack upon his friend, Vivian warmly
replied, that Mr. Wharton ought to restrain his wit where the feelings
of friendship and the character of a man of honour were concerned; that
he did not, in the least, comprehend his insinuations with regard to
Russell; but that, for his own part, he had such firm reliance upon
his friend’s attachment and integrity, that he was at any time ready to
pledge his own honour for Russell’s, and to answer for it with his life.

“Spare your heroics, my dear Vivian!” cried Wharton, laughing; “for we
are not in the days of Pylades and Orestes;--yet, upon my soul, instead
of being as angry with you as you are with me, at this instant I like
you a thousand times the better for your enthusiastic credulity. For
my part, I have, ever since I lived in the world and put away childish
things, regretted that charming instinct of credulity, which experience
so fatally counteracts. I envy you, my dear boy!--as to the rest, you
know Russell’s merits better than I do: I’ll take him henceforward upon
trust from you.”

“Thus Wharton, finding that he was upon dangerous ground, made a timely
retreat: the playful manner and open countenance with which he now
spoke, and the quick transition that he made to other subjects of
conversation, prevented Vivian from suspecting that any settled design
had been formed to detach him from Russell. From this time forward,
Wharton forbore raillery on love and friendship; and, far from seeming
desirous of interfering in Vivian’s private concerns, appeared quite
absorbed in politics. Avowing, as he did, that he was guided solely by
his interest in public life, he laughed at Vivian for professing more
generous principles.

“I know,” cried Wharton, “how to make use of a fine word, and to round a
fine sentence, as well as the best of you; but what a simpleton he must
be who is cheated by his own sophistry!--An artist, an enthusiastic
artist, who is generally half a madman, might fall in love with a statue
of his own making; but you never heard of a coiner, did you, who was
cheated by his own bad shilling? Patriotism and loyalty are counterfeit
coin; I can’t be taken in by them at my time of day.”

Vivian could not forbear to smile at the drollery and wit with which
this profligate defended his want of integrity; yet he sometimes
seriously and warmly asserted his own principles. Upon these occasions,
Wharton either overpowered him by a fine flow of words, or else
listened with the most flattering air of admiration, and silenced him by
compliments to his eloquence. Vivian thought that he was quite secure of
his own firmness; but the contagion of bad example sometimes affects
the mind imperceptibly; as certain noxious atmospheres steal upon the
senses, and excite the most agreeable sensations, while they secretly
destroy the principles of health and life. A day was fixed when a
question of importance was to come on in the House of Commons. Wharton
was extremely anxious to have Vivian’s vote. Vivian, according to the
parliamentary phrase, _had not made up his mind_ on the subject. A heap
of pamphlets on the question lay uncut upon his table. Every morning
he resolved to read them, that he might form his judgment, and vote
according to his unbiassed opinion; but every morning he was interrupted
by some of the fashionable idlers whom his facility of temper had
indulged in the habit of haunting him daily. “Oh, Vivian! we are going
to such and such a place, and you _must_ come with us!” was a mode of
persuasion which he could not resist.

“If I don’t do as they do,” thought he, “I shall be quite unfashionable.
Russell may say what he pleases, but it is necessary to yield to one’s
companions in trifles.

     ‘Whoever would be pleased and please,
     Must do what others do with ease.’”

This couplet, which had been repeated to him by Wharton, recurred to him
continually; and thus Wharton, by slight means, in which he seemed to
have no interest or design, prepared Vivian for his purposes, by working
gradually on the easiness of his disposition. He always argued, that it
could not possibly signify what he did with an hour or two of his day,
till at last Vivian found that he had no hours of his own, that his
whole time was at the disposal of others; and now that he really wanted
leisure to consider an important question,--when his credit, as a member
of the senate, and as a man just entering political life, depended on
this decision,--he literally could not command time to read over the
necessary documents. The mornings were frittered or lounged away in the most
unprofitable and uninteresting manner; some foolish engagement, some trifling
party of pleasure, every day snatched him from himself; his companions kept
possession of him, and there was no possibility of shutting himself up in
his own apartment to meditate: so the appointed day arrived before Vivian’s
opinion was formed; and, from mere want of time to decide for himself,
he voted as Wharton desired. Another and another political question came
on; the same causes operated, and the same consequences ensued. Wharton
managed with great address, so as to prevent him from feeling that he
gave up his free will and Vivian did not perceive, that every day added
a fresh link to that most minute, but strongest of all chains, the chain
of habit.[1] Before Vivian was aware of it, whilst he thought
that he was perfectly independent of all parties, public opinion had
enrolled him amongst Wharton’s partisans. Of this Russell was the first
to give him warning. Russell heard of it amongst the political leaders
who met at Lord Glistonbury’s dinners; and, knowing the danger there is
of a young man’s _committing_ himself on certain points, he, with the
eagerness of a true friend, wrote immediately to put Vivian upon his
guard:--

“My Dear Vivian,

“I am just going into the country with Lord Lidhurst, and perhaps may
not return for some time. I cannot leave you without putting you on your
guard, once more, against Mr. Wharton. I understand that you are thought
to be one of his party, and that he countenances the report. Take care
that you are not bound hand and foot, before you know where you are.

“Your sincere friend,

“H. Russell.”

With the natural frankness of his disposition, Vivian immediately spoke
to Wharton upon the subject.

“What! people say that you are one of my party, do they?” said Wharton:
“I never heard this before, but I am heartily glad to hear it. You are
in for it now, Vivian: you are one of us; and with us you must stand or
fall.”

“Excuse me there!” cried Vivian; “I am not of any party; and am
determined to keep myself independent.”

“Do you remember the honest Quaker’s answer to the man of no party?”
 said Wharton.

“No.”

“I think it was about the year ‘40, when party disputes about Whig
and Tory ran high--but no matter what year, it will do for any time. A
gentleman of undeviating integrity, an independent man, just such a man
as Mr. Vivian, offered himself candidate for a town in the east, west,
north, or south of England--no matter where, it will do for any place;
and the first person whose vote he solicited was a Quaker, who asked him
whether he was a Whig or Tory?--‘Neither. I am an independent, moderate
man; and when the members of administration are right, I will vote with
them--when wrong, against them.’ ‘And be these really thy principles?’
quoth the Quaker; ‘then a vote of mine thou shalt never have. Thou seest
my door, it leadeth into the street; the right hand side of which is for
the Tory, the left for the Whigs; and for a cold-blooded moderate man,
like thee, there is the kennel, and into it thou wilt be jostled, for
thou beest not _decided_ enough for any other situation.’”

“But why should the moderate man be condemned to the kennel?” said
Vivian. “Was there no middle to your Quaker’s road? A stout man cannot
be EASILY jostled into the kennel.”

“Pshaw! pshaw!” said Wharton: “jesting out of the question, a man is
nothing in public life, or worse than nothing, a _trimmer_, unless HE
JOINS a party, and unless he abides by it, too.”

“As long as the party is in the right, I presume, you mean,” said
Vivian.

“Right or wrong’” cried Wharton, “a man must abide by his party. No
power, and no popularity, trust me, without it!--Better stride on the
greasy heads of the mob than be trampled under their dirtier feet. An
armed neutrality may be a good thing, but an unarmed neutrality is fit
only for fools. Besides, in Russell’s grand style, I can bring down the
ancients upon you, and tell you that when the commonwealth is in danger
he cannot be a good man who sides with neither party.”

“If it be so necessary to join a party, and if, after once joining it, I
must abide by it, right or wrong, for life,” said Vivian, “it behoves
me to consider well, before I commit myself; and, before I go into the
ranks, I must see good reason to confide, not only in the abilities, but
in the integrity and public virtue of my leader.”

“Public virtue! sounds fresh from college,” said Wharton; “I would as
soon, and sooner, hear a schoolboy read his theme as hear a man begin to
prose about public virtue--especially a member of parliament. Keep that
phrase, my dear Vivian, till some of the treasury bench come to court
you; then look superb, like a French tragic actor, swelling out your
chest, and throwing the head over the left shoulder--thus--exclaim,
‘Public virtue forbid!’--practise! practise!--for if you do it well, it
may be worth a loud huzza to you yet; or better still, a snug place or
pension. But stay till you’re asked--stay till you’re asked--that’s the
etiquette; never till then let me hear public virtue come out of your
lips, else you’ll raise suspicion of your virtue, and lower your price.
What would you think of a pretty actress who began to talk to you of
her reputation before you put it in any danger? Oh, Vivian! my honest
fellow! unless you would make me think you no better than thousands that
have gone before you, never let me hear from your lips again, till the
_proper_ time, the hypocritical state phrase--public virtue.”

“I had always, till now, understood that it was possible to be a patriot
without being a hypocrite,” replied Vivian; “I always understood that
Mr. Wharton was a patriot.”

“A very fair sarcasm on me,” said Wharton, laughing. “But you know, I’m
a sad dog; never set myself up for a pattern man.--Come! let’s home to
dinner, and a truce with politics and morality. I find, Vivian, you’re a
sturdy fellow, and must have your own way; no bending, no leading you,
I see. Well! it is a good thing to have so much strength of mind: I envy
you.”

It must be recorded to the credit of our hero, that in defiance of
Wharton’s raillery, he talked, and--oh! still more wonderful!--thought
of public virtue, during nearly half of his first session in parliament.
But, alas! whilst his political principles thus withstood the force of
ridicule, temptation soon presented itself to Vivian in a new shape,
and in a form so seducing, as to draw his attention totally away from
politics, and to put his private, if not his public, honour, in the most
imminent peril.




CHAPTER IV.


One morning, as Vivian was walking with Mr. Wharton up Bond-street, they
were met by a party of fashionable loungers, one of whom asked whether
Mrs. Wharton was not come to town yet.

“Mrs. Wharton!” said Vivian, with an air of surprise.

“Yes, she came to town this morning,” said Wharton, carelessly; then
laughing, as he turned to look at Vivian, “Vivian, my good fellow! what
smites you with such surprise? Did not you know I was married?”

“I suppose I must have heard it; but I really forgot it,” said Vivian.

“There you had the advantage of me,” said Wharton, still laughing. “But
if you never heard of Mrs. Wharton before, keep your own secret; for
I can tell you she would never forgive you, though I might. Put a good
face on the matter, at any rate; and swear you’ve heard so much of
her, that you were dying to see her. Some of these gentlemen, who have
nothing else to do, will introduce you whenever you please.”

“And cannot I,” said Vivian, “have the honour of your introduction?”

“Mine! the worst you could possibly have. The honour, as you are pleased
to call it, would be no favour, I assure you. The honour!--honour of a
husband’s introduction! What a novice you are, or would make me believe
you to be! But, seriously, I am engaged to-day at Glistonbury’s: so,
good morning to you.”

Accustomed to hear Wharton talk in the freest manner of women and
marriage in general, and scarcely having heard him mention his own wife,
Vivian had, as he said, absolutely forgotten that Wharton was a married
man. When he was introduced to Mrs. Wharton, he was still more surprised
at her husband’s indifference; for he beheld a lady in all the radiance
of beauty, and all the elegance of fashion: he was so much dazzled by
her charms, that he had not immediately power or inclination to examine
what her understanding or disposition might be; and he could only repeat
to himself, “How is it possible that Wharton can be indifferent to such
a beautiful creature!”

Incapable of feeling any of what he, called the romance of love, the
passion, of course, had always been with Mr. Wharton of a very transient
nature. Tired of his wife’s person, he showed his indifference without
scruple or ceremony. Notorious and glorying in his gallantries, he
was often heard to declare, that no price was too high to be paid for
beauty, except a man’s liberty; but that was a sacrifice which he
would never make to any woman, especially to a wife. Marriage vows
and custom-house oaths he classed in the same order of technical
forms,--nowise binding on the conscience of any but fools and dupes.
Whilst the husband went on in this manner, the wife satisfied herself by
indulgence in her strongest passions--the passion for dress and public
admiration. Childishly eager to set the fashion in trifles, she spent
unconscionable sums on her pretty person; and devoted all her days, or
rather all her nights, to public amusements. So insatiable and restless
is the passion for admiration, that she was never happy for half an hour
together, at any place of public amusement, unless she fixed the gaze
of numbers. The first winter after her marriage she enjoyed the
prerogatives of a fashionable beauty; but the reign of fashion is more
transient even than the bloom of beauty. Mrs. Wharton’s beauty soon grew
familiar, and faded in the public eye; some newer face was this season
the mode. Mrs. Wharton appeared twice at the opera in the most elegant
and becoming dresses; but no one followed her lead. Mortified and
utterly dejected, she felt, with the keenest anguish, the first symptoms
of the decline of public admiration. It was just at this period, when
she was miserably in want of the consolations of flattery, that Vivian’s
acquaintance with her commenced. Gratified by the sort of delighted
surprise which she saw in his countenance the first moment he beheld
her, seeing that he was an agreeable man, and knowing that he was a man
of fortune and family, she took pains to please him by all the common
arts of coquetry. But his vanity was proof against these: the weakness
of the lady’s understanding and the frivolity of her character were, for
some weeks, sufficient antidotes against all the power of her personal
charms; so much so, that at this period he often compared, or rather
contrasted, Mrs. Wharton and Selina, and blessed his happy fate.
He wrote to his friend Russell soon after he was introduced to this
celebrated beauty, and drew a strong and just parallel between
the characters of these two ladies: he concluded with saying,
“Notwithstanding your well-founded dread of the volatility of my
character, you will not, I hope, my dear Russell, do me the injustice to
apprehend that I am in any danger from the charms of Mrs. Wharton.”

Vivian wrote with perfect sincerity; he believed it to be impossible
that he could ever become attached to such a woman as Mrs. Wharton, even
if she had not been married, and the wife of his friend. So, in all the
security of conscious contempt, he went every day to wait upon her, or
rather to meet agreeable company at her house,--a house in which
all that was fashionable and dissipated assembled; where beauty,
and talents, and rank, met and mingled; and where political or other
arrangements prevented the host and hostess from scrupulously excluding
some whose characters were not free from suspicion. Lady Mary Vivian
never went to Mrs. Wharton’s; but she acknowledged that she knew many
ladies of unblemished reputation who thought it no impropriety to
visit there; and Mrs. Wharton’s own character she knew was hitherto
unimpeached. “She is, indeed, a woman of a cold, selfish temper,” said
Lady Mary; “not likely to be led into danger by the tender passion, or
by any of the delusions of the imagination.”

Vivian agreed with his mother in this opinion, and went on paying
his devoirs to her every day. It was the fashion of the times, and
peculiarly the mode of this house, for the gentlemen to pay exclusive
attention to matrons. Few of the young men seemed to think it worth
while to speak to an unmarried woman in any company; and the few who
might be inclined to it were, as they declared, deterred by the danger:
for either the young ladies themselves, or their mothers, immediately
formed expectations and schemes of drawing them into matrimony--the
grand object of the ladies’ wishes and of the gentlemen’s fears. The men
said they could not speak to an unmarried woman, or even dance with her
more than twice, without its being reported that they were going to
be married; and then the friends and relatives of the young ladies
pretended to think them injured and ill-treated, if these reports were
not realized. Our hero had some slight experience of the truth of these
complaints in his own case with the Lady Sarah Lidhurst: he willingly
took the rest upon trust--believed all the exaggerations of his
companions--and began to think it prudent and necessary to follow
their example, and to confine his attentions to married women. Many
irresistible reasons concurred to make Mrs. Wharton the most convenient
and proper person to whom he could pay this sort of homage: besides,
she seemed to fall to his share by lot and necessity; for, at Wharton’s
house, every other lady and every other gentleman being engaged in
gallantry, play, or politics, Mrs. Wharton must have been utterly
neglected if Vivian had not paid her some attention. Common politeness
absolutely required it; the attention became a matter of course, and
was habitually expected. Still he had not the slightest design of going
beyond the line of modern politeness; but, in certain circumstances,
people go wrong a great way before they are aware that they have gone
a single step. It was presently repeated to Mr. Vivian, by some of Mrs.
Wharton’s confidantes, in whispers, and under the solemn promise of
secrecy, that he certainly was a prodigious favourite of hers. He
laughed, and affected to disbelieve the insinuation: it made its
impression, however; and he was secretly flattered by the idea of being
a prodigious favourite with such a beautiful young creature. In some
moments he saw her with eyes of compassion, pitying her for the neglect
with which she was treated by her husband: he began to attribute much
of her apparent frivolity, and many of her faults, more to the want of
a guide and a friend than to a deficiency of understanding or to defects
of character. Mrs. Wharton had just sufficient sense to be cunning--this
implies but a very small portion: she perceived the advantage which she
gained by thus working upon Vivian’s vanity and upon his compassion. She
continued her operations, without being violently interested in their
success; for she had at first only a general wish to attract his
attention, because he was a fashionable young man.

One morning when he called upon Wharton to accompany him to the House of
Commons, he found Mrs. Wharton in tears, her husband walking up and down
the room in evident ill-humour. He stopped speaking when Vivian entered;
and Mrs. Wharton endeavoured, or seemed to endeavour, to conceal her
emotion. She began to play on her harp; and Wharton, addressing himself
to Vivian, talked of the politics of the day. There was some incoherence
in the conversation; for Vivian’s attention was distracted by the air
that Mrs. Wharton was playing, of which he was passionately fond.

“There’s no possibility of doing any thing while there is such a cursed
noise in the room!” cried Wharton. “Here I have the heads of this bill
to draw up--I cannot endure to have music wherever I go--”

He snatched up his papers and retired to an adjoining apartment, begging
that Vivian would wait one quarter of an hour for him.--Mrs. Wharton’s
tears flowed afresh, and she looked beautiful in tears.

“You see--you see, Mr. Vivian--and I am ashamed you should see--how I am
treated.--I am, indeed, the most unfortunate creature upon the face of
the earth; and nobody in this world has the least compassion for me!”

Vivian’s countenance contradicted this last assertion most
positively.--Mrs. Wharton understood this; and her attitude of
despondency was the most graceful imaginable.

“My dear Mrs. Wharton”--(it was the first time our hero had ever called
her “his dear Mrs. Wharton;” but it was only a platonic dear)--“you take
trifles much too seriously--Wharton was hurried by business--a moment’s
impatience must be forgiven.”

“A moment!” replied Mrs. Wharton, casting up to heaven her beautiful
eyes--“Oh! Mr. Vivian, how little do you know of him!--I am the most
miserable creature that ever existed; but there is not a man upon earth
to whom I would say so except yourself.”

Vivian could not help feeling some gratitude for this distinction; and,
as he leaned over her harp with an air of unusual interest, he said
he hoped that he should ever prove himself worthy of her esteem and
confidence.

At this instant Wharton interrupted the conversation, by passing hastily
through the room.--“Come, Vivian,” said he; “we shall be very late at
the house.”

“We shall see you again of course at dinner,” said Mrs. Wharton to
Vivian in a low voice. Our hero replied by an assenting bow.

Five minutes afterwards he repented that he had accepted the invitation,
because he foresaw that he should resume a conversation which was at
once interesting and embarrassing. He felt that it was not right to
become the depository of this lady’s complaints against her husband; yet
he had been moved by her tears, and the idea that he was _the only man
in the world_ to whom she would open her heart upon such a delicate
subject, interested him irresistibly in her favour. He returned in
the evening, and was flattered by observing, that amongst the crowd of
company by which she was surrounded he was instantly distinguished. He
was perfectly persuaded of the innocence of her intentions; and, as
he was attached to another woman, he fancied that he could become the
friend of the beautiful Mrs. Wharton without danger. The first time he
had an opportunity of speaking to her in private, he expressed this
idea in the manner that he thought the most delicately flattering to
her self-complacency. Mrs. Wharton seemed to be perfectly satisfied with
this conduct; and declared, that unless she had been certain that he was
not a man of gallantry, she should never have placed any confidence in
his friendship.

“I consider you,” said she, “quite as a married man:--by-the-bye, when
are you to be married, and what sort of a person is Miss Sidney?--I am
told she is excessively handsome, and amiable, and sensible.--What a
happy creature she is!--just going to be united to the man she loves!”
 Here the lady gave a profound sigh; and Vivian had an opportunity of
observing that she had the longest dark eyelashes that he had ever seen.

“I was married,” continued she, “before I knew what I was about. You
know Mr. Wharton can be so charming when he pleases--and then he was so
much in love with me, and swore he would shoot himself if I would not
have him--and all that sort of thing.--I protest I was terrified; and I
was quite a child, you know. I had been out but six weeks, and I thought
I was in love with him. That was because I did not know what love
was--_then_;--besides, he hurried and teased me to such a degree!--After
all, I’m convinced I married him more out of compassion than any
thing else; and now you see how he treats me!--most barbarously and
tyrannically!--But I would not give the least hint of this to any
man living but yourself. I conjure you to keep my secret--and--pity
me!--that is all I ask--pity me sometimes, when your thoughts are not
absorbed in a happier manner.”

Vivian’s generosity was piqued: he could not be so selfish as to be
engrossed exclusively by his own felicity. He thought that delicacy
should induce him to forbear expatiating upon Selina’s virtues and
accomplishments, or upon his passion. He carried this delicacy so far,
that sometimes for a fortnight or three weeks he never mentioned her
name. He could not but observe that Mrs. Wharton did not like him
the less for this species of sacrifice. In her society, he often met
with people, who spoke of miss Sidney as a prude; or, more mortifying
still, as a person whom nobody knew. As his attachment and approaching
marriage were to be kept secret, he could not betray himself by entering
as warmly into her defence as he might have wished: but his varying colour
showed Mrs. Wharton, on these occasions, what he felt; and she had always
sufficient cunning to repress her dislike to her rival, and to raise herself
in our hero's opinion by a generous silence. It may be observed, that Mrs.
Wharton managed her attack upon Vivian with more art than could be
expected from so silly a woman; but we must consider that all her
faculties were concentrated on one object; so that she seemed to have an
instinct for coquetry. The most silly animals in the creation, from the
insect tribe upwards, show, on some occasions, where their interests
are immediately concerned, a degree of sagacity and ingenuity, which,
compared with their usual imbecility, appears absolutely wonderful. The
opinion which Vivian had early formed of the weakness of this lady’s
understanding prevented him from being on his guard against her
artifices: he could not conceive it possible that he should be duped
by a person so obviously his inferior. With a woman of talents and
knowledge, he might have been suspicious; but there was nothing in Mrs.
Wharton to alarm his pride or to awaken his fears: he fancied that he
could extricate himself in a moment, and with the slightest effort,
from any snares which she could contrive; and, under this persuasion, he
neglected to make even that slight effort, and thus continued from hour
to hour in voluntary captivity.

Insensibly Vivian became more interested for Mrs. Wharton; and, at the
same time, submitted with increased facility to the influence of her
husband. It was necessary that he should have some excuse to the
world, and yet more to his own conscience, for being so constantly at
Wharton’s. The pleasure he took in Wharton’s conversation was still a
sort of involuntary excuse to himself for his intimacy with the lady.
“Wharton’s wit more than Mrs. Wharton’s beauty,” thought he, “is the
attraction that draws me here--I am full as ready to be of his parties
as of hers; and this is the best proof that all is as it should be.”

Wharton’s parties were not always such as Vivian would have chosen; but
he was pressed on, without power of resistance. For instance, one night
Wharton was going with Lord Pontipool and a set of dissipated young
men, to the house of a lady who made herself fashionable by keeping a
faro-bank.

“Vivian, you’ll come along with us?” said Wharton. “Come, we must have
you--unless you are more happily engaged.”

His eye glanced with a mixture of contempt and jealousy upon his wife.
Mrs. Wharton’s alarmed and imploring countenance at the same moment
seemed to say, “For Heaven’s sake, go with him, or I am undone.” In
such circumstances it was impossible for Vivian to say no: he followed
immediately; acting, as he thought, from a principle of honour and
generosity. Wharton was not a man to give up the advantage which he had
gained. Every day he showed more capricious jealousy of his wife, though
he, at the same time, expressed the most entire confidence in the honour
of his friend. Vivian still thought he could not do too much to convince
him that his confidence was not misplaced; and thus, to protect Mrs.
Wharton from suspicion, he yielded to all her husband’s wishes. Vivian
now felt frequently ashamed of his conduct, but always proud of his
motives; and, with ingenious sophistry, he justified to himself the
worst actions, by pleading that he did them with the best intentions.




CHAPTER V.


By this time Lady Mary Vivian began to hear hints of her son’s
attachment to Mrs. Wharton; and, much alarmed, she repented having
encouraged him to form a political or fashionable intimacy with the
Whartons. Suddenly awakened to the perception of the danger, Lady
Mary was too vehement in her terror. She spoke with so much warmth and
indignation, that there was little chance of her counsels being of use.
With the warmest maternal affection for her son, and the best principles
possible, she had not the art of managing his mind, or indeed her own.
Her anxiety about him had, from his childhood, been too great; his
education had been a subject of feverish solicitude, which had increased
as he grew up, and had shown itself in a manner particularly irksome
to him when he entered into the world. This operated against her most
ardent wishes; it decreased instead of securing his confidence and
affection; for it was ridiculous in the eyes of most of the young men
who were his companions, and he had not strength of mind to withstand
their raillery. He grew ashamed of being _kept in awe by his mamma_; and
he thought it incumbent upon him to prove, that he was not under _female
government_. From false shame, he often repressed even the tenderness he
felt for his mother, and forbore to pay her those little attentions, to
which she had been habituated. Lady Mary's quick feelings were immediately
shown in the most imprudent manner, in all the bitter eloquence of reproach:
she would have obtained more gratitude from her son, if she had exacted less.
He felt that he was to blame; but knew, that he was not the monster of
ingratitude, which her imagination and anger sometimes painted. To avoid
discussions, which were extremely painful, he had gradually learned, of late,
to shun her society. By this reciprocation of errours, the mother and son
lost the advantage of the connexion by which nature and habit had united them.
Perhaps, the danger of Vivian's acquaintance with the Whartons might have
been easily prevented in the beginning, if he had had less reserve
with his mother, or she more indulgence for him. And now, when things were
come to such a point, that lady Mary thought it her duty to speak she
spoke with so much warmth and indignation, that there was little chance
of her counsels being of use.

“But, my dear madam, it is only a platonic attachment,” argued Vivian,
when his mother represented to him that the world talked loudly of his
intimacy with Mrs. Wharton.

“A platonic attachment!--Fashionable, dangerous sophistry!” said Lady
Mary.

“Why so, ma’am?” said her son, warmly; “and why should we mind what the
world says? The world is so fond of scandal, that a man and woman cannot
have any degree of friendship for one another without a hue and cry
being immediately raised--and all the prudes and coquettes join at once
in believing, or pretending to believe, that there must be something
wrong. No wonder such a pretty woman as Mrs. Wharton cannot escape envy,
and, of course, censure; but her conduct can defy the utmost malice of
her enemies.”

“I hope so,” said Lady Mary; “and, at all events, I am not one of them.
I know and care very little about Mrs. Wharton, whom I have always been
accustomed to consider as a frivolous, silly woman; but what I wish to
say, though I fear I have lost your confidence, and that my advice will
not--”

“Frivolous! silly!” interrupted Vivian; “believe me, my dear mother, you
and half the world are, and have been, under a great mistake about her
understanding and character.”

“Her forming a platonic friendship with a young man is no great proof
of her sense or of her virtue,” said Lady Mary. “The danger of platonic
attachments, I thought, had been sufficiently understood. Pray, my
dear Charles, never let me hear more from you of platonics with married
women.”

“I won’t use the expression, ma’am, if you have any objection to it,”
 said Vivian; “but, mother, you wish me to live in the most fashionable
company, and yet you desire me not to live as they live, and talk as
they talk: now, that is next to impossible. Pardon me, but I should not
have thought,” added he, laughing, “that you, who like most things that
are fashionable, would object to _platonics_.”

“Object to them!--I despise, detest, abhor them! _Platonics_ have been
the ruin of more women, the destruction of the peace of more families,
than open profligacy ever could have accomplished. Many a married woman,
who would have started with horror at the idea of beginning an intrigue,
has been drawn in to admit of a platonic attachment. And many a man,
who would as soon have thought of committing murder as of seducing his
friend’s wife, has allowed himself to commence a platonic attachment;
and how these end, all the world knows.”

Struck by these words, Vivian suddenly quitted his air of raillery, and
became serious. Had his mother stopped there, and left the rest to his
good sense and awakened perception of danger, all would have been well;
but she was ever prone to say too much; and, in her ardour to prove
herself to be in the right, forgot that people are apt to be shocked, by
having it pointed out that they are utterly in the wrong.

“Indeed, the very word platonics,” pursued she, “is considered, by those
who have seen any thing of life, as the mere watchword of knaves or
dupes; of those who deceive, or of those who wish to be deceived.”

“Be assured, ma’am,” said Vivian, “that Mrs. Wharton is not one of those
who wish either to deceive or to be deceived; and, as to myself, I hope
I am as far from any danger of being a dupe as of being a knave. My
connexion with Mrs. Wharton is perfectly innocent; it is justified
by the example of hundreds and thousands every day in the fashionable
world; and I should do her and myself great injustice, if I broke off
our intimacy suddenly, as if I acknowledged that it was improper.”

“And what can be more improper? since you force me to speak plainly,”
 cried Lady Mary; “what can be more improper than such an intimacy,
especially in your circumstances?”

“My circumstances! What circumstances, ma’am?”

“Have you forgotten Miss Sidney?”

“By no means, ma’am,” said Vivian, colouring deeply; “Mrs. Wharton is
well apprized, and was, from the first moment of our friendship, clearly
informed of my----engagements with Miss Sidney.”

“And how do they agree with your attachment to Mrs. Wharton?”

“Perfectly well, ma’am--Mrs. Wharton understands all that perfectly
well, ma’am.”

“And Miss Sidney! do you think she will understand it?--and is it not
extraordinary that I should think more of her feelings than you do?”

At these questions Vivian became so angry, that he was incapable of
listening farther to reason, or to the best advice, even from a mother,
for whom he had the highest respect. The mother and son parted with
feelings of mutual dissatisfaction.

Vivian, from that spirit of opposition so often seen in weak characters,
went immediately from his mother’s _lecture_ to a party at Mrs.
Wharton’s. Lady Mary, in the mean time, sat down to write to Miss
Sidney. Whatever reluctance she had originally felt to her son’s
marriage with this young lady, it must be repeated, to her ladyship’s
credit, that Selina’s honourable and disinterested conduct had won her
entire approbation. She wrote, therefore, in the strongest terms to
press the immediate conclusion of that match, which she now considered
as the only chance of securing her son’s morals and happiness. Her
letter concluded with these words:--“I shall expect you in town
directly. Do not, my dear, let any idle scruples prevent you from coming
to my house. Consider that my happiness, your own, and my son’s, depend
upon your compliance. I am persuaded, that the moment he sees you, the
moment you exert your power over him, he will be himself again. But,
believe me, I know the young men of the present day better than you do:
their constancy is not proof against absence. If he lose the habit of
seeing and conversing with you, I cannot answer for the rest.--Adieu! I
am so much harassed by my own thoughts, and by the reports I hear, that
I scarcely know what I write. Pray come immediately, my dear Selina,
that I may talk to you of many subjects on which I don’t like to trust
myself to write. My feelings have been too long repressed.--I must
unburden my heart to you. _You_ only can console and assist me; and,
independently of all other considerations, you owe to my friendship
for you, Selina, not to refuse this first request I ever made
you.--Farewell! I shall expect to see you as soon as possible.

“Yours, &c.

“MARY VIVIAN.”

“_St. James’s-street_.”

In this letter, Lady Mary Vivian had not explained the nature of her
son’s danger, or of her fears for him. Motives of delicacy had prevented
her from explicitly telling Miss Sidney her suspicions that Vivian was
attached to a married woman. “Selina,” said her ladyship to herself,
“must, probably, have heard the report from Mr. G----, who is so often
at her mother’s; therefore, there can be no necessity for my saying any
more than I have done. She will understand my hints.”

Unfortunately, however, Miss Sidney did not comprehend, or in the least
suspect, the most material part of the truth; she understood simply,
from Lady Mary’s letter, that Vivian’s affections wavered, and she
imagined that he was, perhaps, on the point of making matrimonial
proposals for some fashionable belle, probably for one of the Lady
Lidhursts; but the idea of his becoming attached to a married woman
never entered her thoughts. Indeed, Mrs. Sidney had, with mistaken kindness,
used every possible precaution to prevent any report or hint of this kind
from reaching Selina. Mr. G-- had mentioned it to Mrs. Sidney; but, from
the dread of giving her daughter pain, she had conjured him never to give
Selina the least hint of what she was convinced woudl turn out to be a false
report. Selina, on her part, fearing to be influenced by her mother's indulgent
counsels, resolved to answer lady Mary's letter, without consulting her,
and without considering any thing, but what _ought_ to be her decision.
Many motives conspired to incline Selina to
accept of the invitation. The certainty that Lady Mary would be highly
offended by a refusal; the hint, that her influence over Vivian would
operate immediately, and in all its force, if he were to see and
converse with her; and that, on the contrary, absence might extinguish
his passion for ever; curiosity to learn precisely the nature of the
reports, which his mother had heard to his disadvantage; but, above
all, a fond wish to be nearer to the man she loved, and to have daily
opportunities of seeing him, prompted Selina to comply with Lady Mary’s
request. On the contrary, good sense and delicacy represented, that
she had released Vivian from all promises, all engagements; that, at
parting, she had professed to leave him perfectly at liberty: that it
would, therefore, be as indelicate as imprudent to make such an attempt
to reclaim his inconstant heart. She had told him, that she desired
to have proof of the steadiness, both of his character and of his
attachment, before she could consent to marry him. From this decision
she could not, she would not, recede. She had the fortitude to persist
in this resolution. She wrote to Lady Mary Vivian in the kindest, but,
at the same time, in the most decided terms, declining the tempting
invitation. When she had heroically signed, sealed, and sent the letter,
she showed her mother lady Mary's letter, and told her how, and why
she had answered it without consulting her.

'I was afraid of your indulgent affection for me,' said Selina. 'I knew,
that your judgement must decide as mine has done, btu that you would dread
to give me present pain; therefore I have had the courage to determine
for myself.'

Selina was surprised and mortified by the sudden and uncontrollable
expression of vexation on her mother's countenance.

'Surely, my dear mother and friend, you cannot but think I have done
right!'

'Young women never do right, when they don't consult their friends',
said Mrs. Sidney pettishly. These were almost the only angry words
Selina had ever heard from her mother; and, as she expected high praise,
instead of blame, she stood quite confounded.

'Nay, don't look so miserable, child,' said Mrs. Sidney; 'it's more my
fault than yours, after all; but I would not, for any consideration, you
had declined this invitation. -- Is the letter gone?'

'Yes, ma'am, two hours ago --.'

'Ah! my dear! I should have told you -- but then, I could not -- indeed
I could not tell you!'

'What? my dear mother!' cried Selina eagerly. 'Pray tell me the whole
truth!'

No -- Mrs. Sidney coudl not bring herself to give so much present pain,
especially when she saw, by the anxiety expressed in Selina's countenance,
how much her sensibility was excited even by this slight hint.

'My love,' said she, 'compose yourself, and every thing will turn out,
you'll see, just as we wish. All young men, particularly all fashionable
young men, as a little inclined to inconstancy; and Vivian, who is now
plunged into the midst of dissipation, must have some allowances made
for him, and for the times. All will be right at last, you'll see;
and, upon the whole, I think, my darling, you have judged, as you always
do, best; and, on many accounts, I am glad you did not accept of 
lady Mary's invitation. -- So forgive me my hasty words, and keep up your
spirits, my child, and all will be well.'

With such vague words of consolation poor Selina might be soothed, but
she could not be comforted: she was supported more by the consciousness
that she had, however painful the effort, done all that she thought
right and honourable.

It happened that Vivian was with his mother at the moment when Selina’s
answer arrived. In the firm belief that such a pressing invitation as
she had sent, to a person in Selina’s circumstances and of Selina’s
temper, could not be refused, her ladyship had made it a point with her
son to dine _tête-à-tête_ with her this day; and she had been talking to
him, in the most eloquent but imprudent manner, of the contrast between
the characters of Mrs. Wharton and Miss Sidney. He protested that his
esteem and love for Miss Sidney were unabated; yet, when his mother told
him that he would, perhaps, in a few minutes see his Selina, he
changed colour, grew embarrassed and melancholy, and thus by his looks
effectually contradicted his words. He was roused from his reverie by
the arrival of Selina’s letter. His mother’s disappointment and anger
were expressed in the strongest terms, when she found that Selina
declined her invitation; but such are the quick and seemingly perverse
turns of the human heart, Vivian grew warm in Selina’s defence the
moment that his mother became angry with her: he read her letter with
tender emotion, for he saw through the whole of it, the strength, as
well as the delicacy of her attachment. All that his mother’s praises
had failed to effect, was immediately accomplished by this letter;
and he, who but an instant before dreaded to meet Selina, now that
she refused to come, was seized with a strong desire to see her; his
impatience was so great, that he would willingly have set out that
instant for the country. Men of such characters as Vivian’s are
peculiarly jealous of their free will; and, precisely because they
know that they are easily led, they resist, in affairs of the heart
especially, the slightest appearance of control.

Lady Mary was delighted to hear her son declare his resolution to leave
town the next morning, and to see Miss Sidney as soon as possible; but
she could not forbear reproaching him for not doing what she wanted
precisely in the manner in which she had planned that it should be done.

“I see, my dear Charles,” cried she, “that even when you do right, I
must not flatter myself that it is owing to any influence of mine. Give
my compliments to Miss Sidney, and assure her that I shall in future
forbear to injure her in your opinion by my interference, or even by
expressing my approbation of her character. My anger, it is obvious, has
served her better than my kindness; and therefore she has no reason to
regret that my affection has been lessened, as I confess it has been, by
her late conduct.”

The next morning, when Vivian was prepared to leave town, he called upon
Wharton, to settle with him about some political, business which was to
be transacted in his absence. Wharton was not at home--Vivian knew that
it would be best to avoid seeing Mrs. Wharton; but he was afraid that
she would be offended, and he could not help _sacrificing a few minutes
to politeness_. The lady was alone; apparently very languid, and
charmingly melancholy. Before Vivian could explain himself, she poured
forth, in silly phrases, but in a voice that made even nonsense please,
a rariety of reproaches for his having absented himself for such a
length of time.--“Positively, she would keep him prisoner, now that
she had him safe once more.” To be kept prisoner by a fair lady was
so flattering, that it was full an hour before he could prevail
upon himself to assert his liberty--the fear of giving pain, indeed,
influenced him still more than vanity. At last, when Mrs. Wharton spoke
of her engagements for the evening, and seemed to take it for granted
that he would be of her party, he summoned resolution sufficient--Oh!
wonderful effort of courage!--to tell her, that he was under a necessity
of leaving town immediately.

“Going, I presume, to--”

“To the country,” said Vivian, firmly.

“To the country!----No, no, no; say at once, to Selina!--Tell me the
worst in one word!”

Astonished beyond measure, Vivian had not power to move. The lady fell
back on the sofa in violent hysterics. Our hero trembled lest any of her
servants should come in, or lest her husband should at his return find
her in this condition, and discover the cause. He endeavoured in vain to
soothe and compose the weeping fair one; he could not have the
barbarity to leave her in this state. By sweet degrees she recovered her
recollection--was in the most lovely confusion--asked where she was, and
what was going to happen. Vivian had not the rashness to run the risk
of a second fit of hysterics; he gave up all thoughts of his journey
for this day, and the lady recovered her spirits in the most flattering
manner. Vivian intended to postpone his journey only for a single
day; but, after he had yielded one point, he found that there was no
receding. He was now persuaded that Mrs. Wharton was miserable; that she
would never forgive herself for having betrayed the state of her heart.
His self-love pleaded powerfully in her favour: he considered that her
husband treated her with mortifying neglect, and provoked the spirit
of retaliation by his gallantries. Vivian fancied that Mrs. Wharton’s
attachment to him might render her wretched, but would never make her
criminal. With sophistical delicacy he veiled his own motives; and,
instead of following the plain dictates of reason, he involved his
understanding in that species of sentimental casuistry which confounds
all principles of right and wrong. But the dread that he felt lest
Wharton should discover what was going on might have sufficiently
convinced him that he was not acting honourably. The suspicions which
Mr. Wharton formerly showed of his wife seemed now to be completely
lulled asleep; and he gave Vivian continually such proofs of confidence
as stung him to the soul. By an absurd, but not an uncommon error of
self-love, Vivian was induced to believe, that a man who professed to
cheat mankind in general behaved towards him in particular with strict
honour, and even with unparalleled generosity. Honesty was too vulgar a
virtue for Wharton; but honour, the aristocratic, exclusive virtue of a
gentleman, he laid claim to in the highest tone. The very frankness with
which Wharton avowed his libertine principles with respect to women,
convinced Vivian that he had not the slightest suspicion that these
could be immediately applied to the ruin of his own wife.

“How can you, my dear Wharton, talk in this manner?” said Vivian once,
when he had been speaking with great _freedom_.

“But it is better,” added he, with a sigh, “to speak than to act like a
villain.”

“Villain!” repeated Wharton, with a sarcastic laugh; “you are grown
quite ridiculous, Vivian: I protest, I don’t understand you. Women
now-a-days are surely able, if not willing enough, to take care of
themselves; and _villains_, though they were very common in the time
of Miss Clarissa Harlowe, and of all the tragedy queens of the last
century, are not to be heard of in these days. Any strange tales of
those male monsters called seducers could gain credit during the ages
of ignorance and credulity; but now, the enlightened world cannot
be imposed upon by such miracles; and a gentleman may be a man of
gallantry--nay, even a lady may be a woman of gallantry--without being
hooted out of society as a _monster_; at all events, the blame is, as it
should be, equally divided between the parties concerned; and if modern
lovers quarrel, they do not die of grief, but settle their differences
in a court of law, where a spinster may have her compensation for a
breach of contract of marriage; a father or a husband their damages for
the loss of the company, affection, solace, services, &c., as the case
may be, of his wife or daughter. All this is perfectly well understood;
and the terrors of law are quite sufficient, without the terrors of
sentiment. If a man punish himself, or let himself be punished, twice
for the same offence, once by his conscience, and once by his king and
his country, he is a fool; and, moreover, acts contrary to the spirit
of the British law, which sayeth--see Blackstone and others--that no
man shall be punished twice for the same offence.--Suffer your
risible muscles to relax, I beseech you, Vivian; and do not affect a
presbyterian rigidity, which becomes your face as ill as your age.”

“I affect nothing--certainly I do not affect presbyterian rigidity,”
 cried Vivian, laughing. “But, after all, Wharton, if you had a daughter
or a sister, what would you think of any man, your friend for instance,
who should attempt--”

“To cut your speech short at once,” interrupted Wharton, “I should not
think at all about the matter; I should blow his brains out, of
course; and afterwards, probably, blow out my own. But treachery from a
friend--from a man of honour--is a thing of which I can hardly form an
idea. Where I give my confidence, I give it without any paltry mental
reservation--I could not suspect a friend.”

Vivian suffered, at this instant, all the agony which a generous mind,
conscious of guilt, could endure. He thought that the confusion of his
mind must be visible in his countenance--his embarrassment was so great
that he could not utter a word. Wharton did not seem to perceive his
companion’s agitation, but passed on carelessly to other subjects of
conversation; and at length completely relieved Vivian from fear of
immediate detection, by asking a favour from him--a pecuniary favour.

“All is safe--Mrs. Wharton, at least, is safe, thank Heaven!” thought
Vivian. “Had her husband the slightest suspicion, he never would
condescend to accept of any favour from me.”

With eagerness, and almost with tears of gratitude, Vivian pressed
upon Wharton the money which he _condescended_ to borrow--it was no
inconsiderable sum.

“Wharton!” cried he, “you sometimes talk freely--too freely; but you
are, I am convinced, the most open-hearted, unsuspicious, generous
fellow upon earth--you deserve a better friend than I am.”

Unable any longer to suppress or conceal the emotions which struggled in
his heart, he broke away abruptly, hurried home, shut himself up in his
own apartment, and sat down immediately to write to Mrs. Wharton. The
idea that Mrs. Wharton loved him in preference to all the fashionable
coxcombs and wits by whom she was surrounded had insensibly raised our
hero’s opinion of her understanding so much, that he now imagined that
the world laboured under a prejudice against her abilities. He gave
himself credit for having discovered that this beauty was not a fool;
and he now spoke and wrote to her as if she had been a woman of sense.
With eloquence which might have moved a woman of genius, with delicacy
that might have touched a woman of feeling, he conjured her to fortify
his honourable resolutions; and thus, whilst it was yet time, to secure
her happiness and his own. “Instead of writing this letter,” added he
in a postscript, “I ought, perhaps, to fly from you for ever; but that
would show a want of confidence in you and in myself; and, besides, upon
the most mature reflection, I think it best to stay, and wait upon you
to-morrow as usual, lest, by my precipitation, I should excite suspicion
in Wharton’s mind.”

The weak apprehension that Mrs. Wharton should betray herself by another
fit of hysterics, if he should leave town, and if his departure
should be suddenly announced to her by her husband, or by some common
acquaintance, induced him to delay a few days longer, that he might
prepare her mind by degrees, and convince her of the necessity for their
absolute separation. When he had finished his letter to Mrs. Wharton, he
was sufficiently well pleased with himself to venture to write to Miss
Sidney. His letters to her had of late been short and constrained; but
this was written with the full flow of affection. He was now in hopes
that he should extricate himself honourably from his difficulties, and
that he might at last claim his reward from Selina.




CHAPTER VI.


After he had despatched his two letters, he became excessively anxious
to receive Mrs. Wharton’s answer. By trifling but unavoidable accidents,
it was delayed a few hours. At last it arrived; Vivian tore it open, and
read with surprise these words:

“Your letter is just what I wished, and makes me the happiest of
women--that is, if you are sincere--which, after all you’ve said, I
can’t doubt. I am so hurried by visitors, and annoyed, that I cannot
write more; but shall have time to talk to-night at the opera.”

At the opera Mrs. Wharton appeared in high spirits, and was dressed with
more than usual elegance. It was observed that she had never been seen
to look so beautiful. There was something in her manner that puzzled
Vivian extremely; this extraordinary gaiety was not what he had reason
to expect. “Is it possible,” thought he, “that this woman is a mere
coquette, who has been amusing herself at my expense all this time,
and can now break off all connexion with me without a moment’s regret?”
 Vivian’s pride was piqued: though he wished to part from the lady, he
could not bear that this parting should evidently cost her nothing.
He was mortified beyond expression by the idea that he had been duped.
After the opera was over, whilst Mrs. Wharton was waiting for her
carriage, he had an opportunity of speaking to her without being
overheard.

“I am happy,” said he, with a constrained voice, “I am extremely happy
to see you, madam, in such charming spirits to-night.”

“But are not you a strange man to look so grave?” cried Mrs. Wharton. “I
vow, I don’t know what to make of you! But I believe you want to quarrel
for the pleasure of making it up again. Now that won’t do. By-the-bye,
I have a quarrel with you, sir.--How came you to sign your name to that
foolish stuff you wrote me yesterday? Never do so any more, I charge
you, for fear of accidents. But what’s the matter now?--You are a
strange mortal!--Are you going to die upon the spot?--What is the
matter?”

“My letter to you was not signed, I believe,” said Vivian, in an altered
voice.

“Indeed it was,” said Mrs. Wharton. “It was signed Charles Vivian at
full length. But why are you in such tremors about it? I only mentioned
it to put you on your guard in future.--I’ve burnt the letter--people
always get themselves into scrapes if they don’t burn love-letters--as
I’ve often heard Mr. Wharton say,” added she, laughing.

To his unspeakable consternation, Vivian now discovered that he had
sent the letter intended for Selina to Mrs. Wharton; and that which was
designed for Mrs. Wharton he had directed to Miss Sidney. Vivian was
so lost in thought, that the cry of _“Mrs. Wharton’s carriage stops
the way!”_ was vociferated many times before he recovered sufficient
presence of mind to hand the lady out of the house. He went home
immediately, that he might reflect upon what was best to be done. His
servant presently gave him a letter which a messenger had just brought
from the country. The packet was from Selina.

“Enclosed, I return the letter which I received from you this morning. I
read the first three lines of it before I perceived that it could not be
intended for me--I went no farther.--I cannot help knowing for whom
it was designed; but you may be assured that your secret shall be kept
inviolably.--You have no reproaches to fear from me.--This is the last
letter I shall ever write to you.--Leave it to me to explain my own
conduct to my mother and to yours; if they think me capricious, I can
bear it. I shall tell them that my sentiments are totally changed: I am
sure I can say so with perfect truth.--Oh, Vivian, it is you who are to
be pitied; every thing may be endured except remorse. Would to Heaven, I
could save you from the reproaches of your own heart!--Adieu!

“SELINA SIDNEY.”

The feelings of Vivian’s mind, on reading this letter, cannot be
described. Admiration, love, tenderness, remorse, successively seized
upon his heart. Incapable of any distinct reflection, he threw himself
upon his bed, and closed his eyes, endeavouring to compose himself to
sleep, that he might forget his existence. But, motionless as he lay,
the tumult of his mind continued unabated. His pulse beat high; and
before morning he was in a fever. The dread that his mother should come
to attend him, and to inquire into the cause of his illness, increased
his agitation:--she came. Her kindness and anxiety were fresh torments
to her unhappy son. Bitterly did he reproach himself as the cause of
misery to those he loved and esteemed most in the world. He became
delirious; and, whilst he was in this state, he repeated Mrs. Wharton’s
name sometimes in terms of endearment, sometimes in accents of
execration. His mother’s suspicions of his intrigue were confirmed by
many expressions which burst from him, and which were thought by his
attendants to be merely the ravings of fever. Lady Mary had, at this
crisis, the prudence to conceal her doubts, and to keep every body, as
much as possible, out of her son’s apartment. In a few days his fever
subsided, and he recovered to the clear recollection of all that
had passed previously to his illness. He almost wished to be again
delirious. The first time he was left alone, he rose from his bed,
unlocked his bureau, and seized Selina’s letter, which he read again and
again, studying each line and word, as if he could draw from them every
time a new meaning.

“She read but three lines of my letter,” said he to himself; “then she
only guesses that I have an intrigue with Mrs. Wharton, without knowing
that in this very letter I used my utmost influence to recall Mrs.
Wharton to--herself.”

The belief that Selina thought worse of him than he deserved was
some consolation to Vivian. He was resolved to recover her esteem: he
determined to break off all connexion with Mrs. Wharton; and, full of
this intention, he was impatient till the physicians permitted him to go
abroad. When he was at last free from their dominion, had escaped from
his chamber, and had just gained the staircase, he was stopped by his
mother.

“Charles,” said she, “before you quit me again, it is my duty to say a
few words to you upon a subject of some importance.”

Lady Mary led the way to her dressing-room with a dignified air; Vivian
followed with a mixture of pride and alarm in his manner. From the bare
idea of a maternal lecture his mind revolted: he imagined that she was
going to repeat the remonstrance which she had formerly made against his
intimacy with Mrs. Wharton, and against _platonics_ in general; but he
had not the least apprehension that she had discovered the whole truth:
he was, therefore, both surprised and shocked, when she spoke to him in
the following manner:

“The libertinism of the age in which we live has so far loosened all
the bonds of society, and all the ties of nature, that I doubt not but
a mother’s anxiety for the morals of her son--her only son--the son over
whose education she has watched from his infancy, may appear, even in
his eyes, a fit subject for ridicule. I am well aware that my solicitude
and my counsels have long been irksome to him, I have lost his
affections by a steady adherence to my duty; but I shall persevere with
the less reluctance, since the dread of my displeasure, or the hope of
my approbation, cannot now touch his sensibility. During your illness,
you have betrayed a secret--you have reason to start with horror. Is
it possible that a son of mine, with the principles which I have
endeavoured to instil into his mind, should become so far depraved? Do
I live to hear, from his own lips, that he is the seducer of a married
woman--and that woman the wife of his friend?”

Vivian walked up and down the room in great agony: his mother continued,
with increased severity of manner, “I say nothing of your dissimulation
with me, nor of all your _platonic_ subterfuges--I know that, with a
man of intrigue, falsehood is deemed a virtue. I shall not condescend to
inquire farther into your guilty secrets--I now think myself fortunate
in having no place in your confidence. But I here declare to you, in the
most solemn manner, that I never will see you again until all connexion
between you and Mrs. Wharton is utterly dissolved. I do not advise--I
COMMAND, and must be obeyed--or I cast you off for ever.”

Lady Mary left the room as she uttered these words. Her son was deeply
struck with his mother’s eloquence: he knew she was right, yet his pride
was wounded by the peremptory severity of her manner:--his remorse and
his good resolutions gave place to anger. The more he felt himself
in the wrong, the less he could bear to be reproached by the voice
of authority. Even because his mother _commanded_ him to give up all
connexion with Mrs. Wharton, he was inclined to disobey--he could not
bear to seem to do right merely in compliance to her will. He went to
visit Mrs. Wharton in a very different temper from that in which, half
an hour before this conference with his mother, he had resolved to see
the lady. Mrs. Wharton knew how to take advantage both of the weakness
of his character and of the generosity of his temper. She fell into
transports of grief when she found that Lady Mary Vivian and Miss Sidney
were in possession of her secret. It was in vain that Vivian assured her
that it would be kept inviolably; she persisted in repeating, “that her
reputation was lost; that she had sacrificed every thing for a man who
would, at last, desert her in the most treacherous and barbarous
manner, leaving her at the mercy of her husband, the most profligate,
hard-hearted tyrant upon earth. As to her being reconciled to him,” she
declared, “_that_ was totally out of the question; his behaviour to her
was such, that she could not live with him, even if her heart were not
fatally prepossessed in favour of another.” Her passions seemed wrought
to the highest pitch. With all the eloquence of beauty in distress, she
appealed to Vivian as her only friend; she threw herself entirely upon
his protection; she vowed that she could not, would not, remain another
day in the same house with Mr. Wharton; that her destiny, her existence,
were at Vivian’s mercy. Vivian had not sufficient fortitude to support
this scene. He stood irresolute. The present temptation prevailed over
his better resolutions. He was actually persuaded by this woman, whom
he did not love, whom he could not esteem, to carry her off to the
continent--whilst, at the very time, he admired, esteemed, and loved
another. The plan of the elopement was formed and settled in a few
minutes;--on Mrs. Wharton’s part, apparently with all the hurry of
passion; on Vivian’s with all the confusion of despair. The same
carriage, the very same horses, that had been ordered to carry our hero
to his beloved Selina, conveyed him and Mrs. Wharton the first stage
of their flight towards the continent. The next morning the following
paragraph appeared in the newspapers:--

“Yesterday, the beautiful and fashionable Mrs. W----, whose marriage we
announced last year to the celebrated Mr. W----, eloped from his
house in St. James’s-street, in company with C---- V----, member for
----shire. This catastrophe has caused the greatest _sensation_ and
astonishment in the circles of fashion; for the lady in question had
always, till this fatal step, preserved the most unblemished reputation;
and Mr. and Mrs. W---- were considered as models of conjugal felicity.
The injured husband was attending his public duty in the House of
Commons; and, as we are credibly informed, was, with patriotic ardour,
speaking in his country’s cause, when this unfortunate event, which for
ever bereaves him of domestic happiness, took place. What must
increase the poignancy of his feelings upon the occasion remains to be
stated--that the seducer was his intimate friend, a young man, whom he
had raised into notice in public life, and whom he had, with all that
warmth and confidence of heart for which he is remarkable, introduced
into his house, and trusted with his beloved wife. Mr. W---- is, we
hear, in pursuit of the fugitives.”




CHAPTER VII.


In the modern fashionable code of honour, when a man has seduced or
carried off his friend’s wife, the next thing he has to do is to fight
the man whom he has injured and betrayed. By thus appealing to the
ordeal of the duel, he may not only clear himself from guilt; but, if
it be done with proper spirit, he may acquire celebrity and glory in the
annals of gallantry, and in the eyes of the fair and innocent. In our
hero’s place, most men of fashion would have triumphed in the notoriety
of his offence, and would have rejoiced in an opportunity of offering
the husband the satisfaction of a gentleman. But, unfortunately for
Vivian, he had not yet suited his principles to his practice: he had
acted like a man of fashion; but, alas! he still thought and felt like a
man of virtue--as the following letter will show.

“TO THE REV. HENRY RUSSELL.

“Indignant as you will be, Russell, at all you hear of me, you cannot
be more shocked than I am myself. I do not write to palliate or
apologize--my conduct admits of no defence--I shall attempt none,
private or public--I have written to my lawyer to give directions that
no sort of defence shall be set up on my part, when the affair comes
into Doctors’ Commons--as it shortly will; for I understand that poor
Wharton has commenced a prosecution. As to damages he has only to name
them--any thing within the compass of my fortune he may command. Would
to God that money could make him amends! But he is too generous, too
noble a fellow--profligate as he is in some things, how incapable would
he be of acting as basely as I have done! There is not, perhaps, at
this moment, a human being who has so high an opinion of the man I have
injured as I have myself:--he did not love his wife--but that is no
excuse for me--his honour is as much wounded as if I had robbed him of
her during the time he loved her most fondly:--he once doted upon her,
and would have loved her again, when he was tired of his gallantries;
and they might then have lived together as happily as ever, if I had
not been--. What was I?--What am I?--Not a villain--or I should glory in
what I have done--but the weakest of human beings--and how true it is,
Russell, that ‘all wickedness is weakness!’

“I understand that W----, wherever he goes, calls me a coward, as
well as a scoundrel; and says that I have kept out of the way to avoid
fighting him. He is mistaken. It is true, I had the utmost dread of
having his life to answer for--and nothing should have provoked me to
fire upon him;--but I had determined how to act--I would have met him,
and have stood his fire. I should not be sorry, at present, to be put
out of the world; and would rather fall by his hand than by any other.
But since this is out of the question, and that things have taken
another turn, I have only to live, as long as it shall please God, a
life of remorse--and, at least, to try to make the unfortunate woman who
has thrown herself upon my protection as happy as I can.

“If you have any remaining regard for a pupil who has so disgraced you,
do me one favour--Go to Miss Sidney, and give her what comfort you can.
Say nothing _for me_, or _of me_, but that I wish her to forget me
as soon as possible. She discarded me from her heart when she first
discovered this intrigue--before this last fatal step. Still I had
hopes of recovering her esteem and affection; for I had resolved--But no
matter what I resolved--all my resolutions failed; and now I am utterly
unworthy of her love. This, and all that is good and happy in life, all
the fair hopes and virtuous promises of my youth, I must give up. Early
as it is in my day, my sun has set. I truly desire that she should
forget me; for you know I am bound in honour--Honour! How dare I use the
word? I am bound, after the divorce, to marry the woman I have seduced.
Oh, Russell! what a wife for your friend!--What a daughter-in-law for my
poor mother, after all her care of my education--all her affection--all
her pride in me!--It will break her heart! Mine will not break. I shall
drag on, perhaps, to a miserable old age. I am of too feeble a nature to
feel these things as strong minds would--as you will for me; but do not
blame yourself for my faults. All that man could do for me, you did.
This must be some consolation to you, my dear and excellent friend! May
I still call you friend?--or have I no friend left upon earth?

“C. VIVIAN.”

From this letter some idea may be formed of what this unhappy man
suffered at this period of his life, from “the reflections of a mind not
used to its own reproaches.” The view of the future was as dreadful
as the retrospect of the past. His thoughts continually dwelt upon the
public trial which was preparing--before him he saw all its disgraceful
circumstances. Then the horror of marrying, of passing his whole future
existence with a woman whom he could not esteem or trust! These last
were secret subjects of anxiety and anguish, the more intensely felt,
because he could not speak of them to any human being. Such as Mrs.
Wharton was, she was to be his wife; and he was called upon to defend
her against reproach and insult,--if possible, from contempt. During
the course of six weeks, which they spent together in exile at Brussels,
Vivian became so altered in his appearance, that his most intimate
friends could scarcely have known him; his worst enemies, if he had had
any, could not have desired the prolongation of his sufferings.

One evening, as he was sitting alone in his hotel, ruminating bitter
thoughts, a letter was brought to him from Mr. Russell; the first he had
received since he left England. Every one, who has been absent from his
friends in a foreign country, must know the sort of emotion which
the bare sight of a letter from _home_ excites; but, in Vivian’s
circumstances, abandoned as he felt himself, and deserving to be
abandoned by his best friends, the sight of a letter from Russell so
struck him, that he gazed upon the direction for some minutes, almost
without power or wish to open it. At last he opened, and read, “Return
to your country, your friends, and yourself, Vivian! Your day is not
yet over! Your sun is not yet set!--Resume your energy--recover your
self-confidence--carry your good resolutions into effect--and you may
yet be an honour to your family, a delight to your fond mother, and
the pride of your friend Russell. Your remorse has been poignant and
sincere; let it be salutary and permanent in its consequences. The part
of a man of sense and virtue is to make his past errors of use to his
future conduct. Whilst I had nothing to say that could give you pleasure.
Now, I can relieve your mind from part of the load by which it has been oppressed.
You have not betrayed Mr. Wharton; he has betrayed you. You have
not seduced Mrs. Wharton; you have been seduced by her. You are not
bound to marry her--Wharton cannot obtain a divorce--he dare not bring
the affair to trial; if he does, he is undone. There has been collusion
between the parties. The proof of this you will find in the enclosed
paper, which will be sworn to, in due legal form, whenever it is
necessary. Even when you see them, you will scarcely believe these
‘damning proofs’ of Wharton’s baseness. But I always knew, I always told
you, that this pretence to honour and candour, frankness and friendship,
with this avowed contempt of all principle and all virtue, could not
be safe, could not be sincere, would not _stand the test_.--No--nothing
should make me trust to the private honour of a man so corrupt in public
life as Mr. Wharton. A man who sells his conscience for his interest
will sell it for his pleasure. A man who will betray his country will
betray his friend. It is in vain to palter with our conscience: there
are not two honours--two honesties -- it is all one virtue -- integrity!
---- How I rejoice at this moment, in the
reflection that your character, as a public man, is yet untarnished
You have still this great advantage:--feel its value. Return, and
distinguish yourself among your countrymen: distinguish yourself by
integrity still more than by talents. A certain degree of talents is
now cheap in England: integrity is what we want--true patriotism, true
public spirit, noble ambition not that vile scramble for places and
pensions, which some men call ambition; not that bawling, brawling,
_Thersites_ character, which other men call public spirit; not that
marketable commodity with which Wharton, and such as he, cheat popular
opinion for a season;--but that fair virtue which will endure, and abide
by its cause to the last; which, in place or out, shall be the same;
which, successful or unsuccessful, shall sustain the possessor’s
character through all changes of party; which, whilst he lives, shall
command respect from even the most profligate of his contemporaries;
upon which, when he is dying, he may reflect with satisfaction; which,
after his death, shall be the consolation of his friends, and the glory
of his country. All this is yet in your power, Vivian.--Come, then, and
fulfil the promise of your early years! Come, and restore to your mother
a son worthy of her!--Come, and surpass the hopes of your true friend,

“H. RUSSELL.”

The rapid succession of feelings with which Vivian read this letter
can scarcely be imagined. The paper it enclosed was from a former
waiting-maid of Mrs. Wharton’s; a woman who was expected to be the
principal evidence on Mr. Wharton’s side. She had been his mistress; one
of those innumerable mistresses, to whom he had, of course, addressed
his transferable promises of eternal constancy. She too, of course, had
believed the vow, in spite of all experience and probability; and while
she pardoned his infidelities to her mistress, &c. all which she deemed
_very natural for a gentleman like him_, yet she was astonished and
outrageous when she found him faithless to her own charms. In a fit of
jealousy she flew to Mr. Russell, whom she knew to be Vivian’s friend;
and, to revenge herself on Wharton, revealed the secrets which she had
in her power; put into Russell’s hands the proofs of collusion between
Mr. Wharton and his wife; and took malicious pains to substantiate
her evidence, to a lawyer’s full satisfaction; knowing that she might
prevent the possibility of a divorce, and that she should thus punish
her perjured inconstant in the most sensible manner, by at once
depriving him of twenty thousand pounds damages, and by chaining him
again to a wife whom he abhorred.

The same post which brought Vivian this woman’s deposition and Russell’s
letter brought Mrs. Wharton notice that the whole plan of collusion
was discovered: she was therefore prepared for Vivian’s reproaches,
and received the first burst of his astonishment and indignation with a
studied Magdalen expression of countenance: then she attempted a silly
apology, laying all the blame on her husband, and vowing that she had
acted under terror, and that her life would not have been safe in his
hands if she had not implicitly obeyed and executed his horrid plans.
She wept and kneeled in vain. Finding Vivian immoveable in his purpose
to return immediately to England, she suddenly rose from her knees, and,
all beautiful as she was, looked in Vivian’s eyes like a fiend, whilst,
with an unnatural smile, she said to him, “You see, fool as I am thought
to be, I have been too clever for _some people_; and I can tell Mr.
Wharton that I have been too clever for him too. His heart is set upon
a divorce; but he can’t have it. He can’t marry Miss P----, nor yet
her fortune, nor ever shall! I shall remain at Brussels--I have friends
here--and friends who were my friends before I was forced to give my
hand to Mr. Wharton, or my smiles to you, sir!--people who will not
tease me with talking of remorse and repentance, and such ungallant,
ungentlemanlike stuff; nor sit bewailing themselves, like a country
parson, instead of dashing out with me here in a fashionable style, as
a man of any spirit would have done. But you!--you’re neither good nor
bad; and no woman will ever love you, nor ever did. Now you know my
whole mind.”

“Would to Heaven I had known it sooner!” said Vivian. “No--I rejoice
that I did not sooner know, and that I never could have suspected, such
depravity!--under such a form, too.”

Mrs. Wharton’s eye glanced with satisfaction upon the large mirror
opposite to her. Vivian left her in utter disgust and horror. “Drive
on!” cried he, as he threw himself into the chaise that was to carry him
away; “Faster! faster!”

The words, “and no woman will ever love you, nor ever, did,” rung upon
Vivian’s ear. “There she is mistaken, thank Heaven!” said he to himself:
yet the words still dwelt upon his mind, and gave him exquisite pain.
Upon looking again at Russell’s letter, he observed that Selina Sidney’s
name was never mentioned; that she was neither directly nor indirectly
alluded to in the whole letter. What omen to draw from this he could not
divine. Again he read it; and all that Russell said of public life, and
his exhortations to him to come and distinguish himself in public and in
the political world, struck him in a new light. It seemed as if Russell
was sensible that, there were no farther hopes of Selina, and that
therefore he tried to turn Vivian’s mind from love to ambition. Fourteen
times he read over this letter before he reached England; but he could
not discover from it any thing as to the point on which his heart was
most interested. He reached London in this, uncertainty.

“Put me out of suspense, my best friend,” cried he, the moment he saw
Russell: “tell me, is Selina living?”

“Yes--she has been very ill, but is now recovered--quite recovered, and
with your mother, who is grown fonder of her than ever she was.”

“Selina alive! well! and with my mother!--and may I--I don’t mean may I
_now_,--but may I _ever_ hope?--Believe me, I feel myself capable of any
exertions, any forbearance, to obtain her forgiveness--to merit--May I
ever hope for it?--Speak!”

Russell assured him that he need not dread Miss Sidney’s resentment, for
that she felt none; she had expressed pity more than anger--that she had
taken pains to sooth his mother; and had expressed sincere satisfaction
on hearing of his _release_ from his unworthy bondage, and at his return
home to his friends.

The tone in which Russell spoke, and the seriousness and embarrassment
of his manner, alarmed Vivian inexpressibly. He stood silent, and
dared not ask farther explanation for some minutes.--At length he broke
silence, and conjured his friend to go immediately to Miss Sidney and
his mother, and to request permission for him to see them both in each
other’s presence. Russell said, that if Vivian insisted, he would comply
with his request; but that he advised him not to attempt to see Miss
Sidney at present; not till he had been some time in London--till he
had given some earnest of the steadiness of his conduct--till he had
appeared again, and distinguished himself in public life. “This might
raise you again in her esteem; and,” continued Russell, “you must be
aware that her love depends on her esteem--at least, that the one cannot
exist without the other.”

“Will you deliver a letter to her from me?” said Vivian. “If you think
I had better not attempt to see her yet, you will deliver a letter for
me?”

After some hesitation, or rather some deliberation, Russell answered,
in a constrained voice, “I will deliver your letter, if you insist upon
it.”

Vivian wrote:--Russell undertook to deliver the letter, though with
evident reluctance. In the mean time Vivian went to see his mother,
whom he longed, yet dreaded to meet. Her manner was not now severe and
haughty, as when she last addressed him; but mild and benign: she held
out her hand to him, and said, “Thank God! my son is restored to me, and
to himself!”

She could say no more; but embraced him tenderly. Russell had shown Lady
Mary that her son had been the dupe of a preconcerted scheme to work
upon his passions. She deplored his weakness, but she had been touched
by his sufferings; and was persuaded that his remorse would guard him
against future errors. Therefore not a word or look of reproach escaped
from her. When he spoke of Selina, Lady Mary, with great animation of
countenance and warmth of eulogium, declared, that it was the first wish
of her heart to see her son married to a woman of such a noble character
and angelic temper; “_but_,” added her ladyship, her manner changing
suddenly, as she pronounced the word _but_--before she could explain
the _but_, Russell came into the room, and told Vivian that Miss Sidney
desired to see him. Vivian heard the words with joy; but his joy
was checked by the great gravity and embarrassment of his friend’s
countenance, and by a sigh of ill omen from his mother. Eager to relieve
his suspense, he hastened to Selina, who, as Russell told him, was in
Lady Mary’s dressing-room--the room in which he had first declared his
passion for her. Hope and fear alternately seized him--fear prevailed
the moment that he beheld Selina. Not that any strong displeasure
appeared in her countenance--no, it was mild and placid; but it was
changed towards him, and its very serenity was alarming. Whilst she
welcomed him to his native country and to his friends, and while she
expressed hopes for his future happiness, all hope forsook him, and,
in broken sentences, he attempted to stammer out some answer; then,
throwing himself into a chair, he exclaimed, “I see all future happiness
is lost for me--and I deserve it!”

“Do not reproach yourself,” said Selina in a sweet voice; but the voice,
though sweet, was so altered to him, that it threw him into despair. “It
is my wish, not to inflict, but to spare you pain. I have, therefore,
desired to see you as soon as possible, that you might not form false
expectations.”

“Then you no longer love me, Selina? Now, after all I have suffered, you
have the cruelty to tell me so? And you, who could form my character to
every thing that is good and honourable; you, who alone could restore me
to myself--you reject, you cast me from you for ever?”

“I have suffered much,” said Selina, in a trembling voice, “since we
parted.”

Vivian’s eye quickly ran over her face and whole form as she spoke these
words; and he saw, indeed, traces of sickness and suffering: with the
idea of his power over her affections, his hopes revived; he seized the
feeble hand, which lay motionless; but she withdrew it decidedly,
and his hopes again forsook him, when she gently raised her head, and
continued to speak, “I have suffered much since we parted, Mr. Vivian;
and I hope you will spare me unnecessary and useless pain in this
interview: painful to a certain degree it must be to both of us; for I
cannot, even now that all feelings of passion have subsided, and that
the possibility of my being united to you is past, tell you so, with all
the composure which I had expected to do; nor with all the firmness of
voice and manner which is necessary, perhaps, to convince you of the
truth, and to restore your mind to itself.”

“The possibility of my being united to you is past!--Why?” interrupted
Vivian, incapable of understanding or listening to any thing else, till
this question was answered.

“Do not force me to what may seem like cruel reproach; but let it
suffice for me to say, that my sentiments have been so much altered by
a _year’s experience_, that it is impossible for me ever to become your
wife. My love was founded on esteem. I had, indeed, always fears of the
instability of your character; therefore, I put your resolution to the
proof: the event has proved to me that my fears were but too just. I
speak with difficulty; for I cannot easily give you so much pain as I
know that I am inflicting at this moment. But,” resumed she, in a more
resolute tone, “it is absolutely necessary for your future peace of
mind, as well as for my own, that I should convince you I am sincere,
perfectly sincere, at this moment; that I know my own heart; that my
determination has not been hastily formed, and cannot be altered. The
deliberate manner in which I now speak to you will, I hope, persuade you
of this truth. And if I have hesitated, or showed any agitation in this
interview, attribute it to its real cause--the weakness of my health;
feebleness of body, not of mind.”

She rose to leave the room; but Vivian detained her, beseeching her,
with all the eloquence of passion in despair, to hear him but for
one moment; whilst he urged that there was no probability of his ever
relapsing into errors from which he had suffered so much; that now his
character was formed by adversity; and that such was the power which
Selina possessed over his heart, that a union with her would, at this
crisis, decide his fate; that her steadiness would give stability to
his resolutions; and that his gratitude would so increase his affection,
that he should have the strongest possible motives to make her a good
husband; that when he was happy in domestic life, he should feel every
energy of his mind revive; that he should exert all his powers to
distinguish himself, and to justify the choice of the woman he adored.

In spite of the word _adored_, which has usually such power to confound
female judgment, Selina perceived that all he said was merely a
repetition of his former arguments, of which experience had proved the
insufficiency. She was aware that, if before marriage his resolution and
constancy had not been able to support the trial, it would be folly
or madness to marry him with the vague hope that she might reform his
character. She therefore continued steady to her resolution; and as she
found that Vivian’s disappointment was greater than she had expected,
she immediately withdrew from his mother’s house. The next morning, when
Vivian came to breakfast, after having spent a sleepless night, planning
new arguments or new intreaties in favour of his love, he found that
his mistress was gone. His mother and his friend Russell joined in
representing to him that it would be useless to follow her, that it
would only give himself and Selina unavailing pain. Vivian felt this
stroke severely. His mind was, as it were, adrift again. After the first
violence of his feelings had spent itself, and when he sunk into that
kind of apathy which is the consequence of exhausted passion, his friend
Russell endeavoured to excite him to honourable ambition. Vivian caught
the idea, that if he distinguished himself in public life, and if he
there displayed any steadiness of character, he might win back Selina’s
esteem and affection. Fired with this hope, he immediately turned his
whole mind to the object; applied with indefatigable ardour, day and
night, to make himself master of the subjects likely to be discussed
in the ensuing session of parliament. At length his application and
his energy were crowned with success. On a question of considerable
political importance, which he had carefully considered, he made an
excellent speech; a speech which directly made him of consequence in
the house; which, in the language of the newspapers, “was received with
unbounded applause, was distinguished for strength of argument, lucid
order, and a happy choice of expression.” But what encouraged our hero
more than newspaper puffs or party panegyrics was the approbation of
his friend Russell. Russell never praised violently; but a few words,
or even a look of satisfaction from him, went farther than the most
exaggerated eulogiums from others. Vivian pursued his course for some
time with honour and increasing reputation. There was one man who never
joined in any of the compliments paid to the rising orator; there was
one man who always spoke of him with contempt, who pronounced that
“Vivian would never go far in politics--that it was not in him--that
he was too soft--_que c’étoit bâtir sur de la boue, que de compter sur
lui_.” This depreciator and enemy of Vivian was the man who, but a
few months before, had been his political _proneur_ and unblushing
flatterer, Mr. Wharton. Exasperated by the consciousness of his own
detected baseness, and provoked still more by his being frustrated in
all his schemes, Wharton now practised every art that a malicious and
unprincipled wit could devise to lower the opinion of Vivian’s talents,
and to prevent his obtaining either power or celebrity. Our hero was
stimulated by this conduct to fresh exertions. So far Wharton’s enmity
was of service to him; but it was of disservice, by changing, in some
measure, the purity of the motives from which he acted. With love and
honourable ambition now mixed hatred, thoughts of vengeance, views
of vulgar vanity and interest: he thought more of contradicting Mr.
Wharton’s prophecies than of fulfilling his own ideas of what was fair
and right. He was anxious to prove, that he could “_go far_ in politics,
that it was _in him_, that he was not too soft, and that it was not
building on mud to depend on him.” These indefinite expressions operated
powerfully and perniciously on his imagination. To prove that Wharton
was mistaken in his prognostics, it was necessary to our hero to obtain
the price and stamp of talents--it was essential to gain political
power; and this could not be attained without joining a party. Vivian
joined the party then in opposition. Wharton and he, though both in
opposition, of course, after what had passed, could never meet in any
private company; nor had they any communication in public, though on the
same side of the question: their enmity was so great, that not only
the business of the nation, but even the interests of their party, were
often impeded by their quarrels. In the midst of these disputes, Vivian
insensibly adopted more and more of the language and principles of the
public men with whom he daily associated. He began to hear and talk of
compensations and jobs, as they did; and to consider all measures
proved to be necessary for the support of his party as expedient, if
not absolutely right. His country could not be saved, unless he and his
friends could obtain the management of affairs; and no men, be found,
could gain parliamentary influence, or raise themselves into political
power, without _acting as a body_. Then, of course, all subordinate
points of right were to be sacrificed to the great good of promoting the
views of the party. Still, however, his patriotism was upon the whole
pure; he had no personal views of interest, no desire even to be in
place, independently of a wish to promote the good of his country.
Secret overtures were, about this time, made to him by government; and
inquiries were made if there was any thing which could gratify him, or
by which he could be induced to lay aside his opposition, and to assist
in supporting their measures. Many compliments to his talents and
eloquence, and all the usual _commonplaces_, about the expediency and
propriety of _strengthening the hands of government_, were, of course,
added. Something _specific_ was at length mentioned: it was intimated,
that as he was of an ancient family, it might gratify him that his
mother should be made a baroness in her own right. The offer was
declined, and the temptation was firmly withstood by our hero; his
credit was now at its _acme_ with his own coadjutors. Lady Mary
whispered the circumstance, as a state secret, to all her acquaintance;
and Russell took care that Miss Sidney should hear of it.

Vivian was now cited as an incorruptible patriot. Wharton’s malice, and
even his wit, was almost silenced; yet he was heard to say, amidst the
din of applause, “This is only the first offer; he is in the right
to make a show of resistance: he will coquet for a time, and keep
_philandering_ on till he suits himself, and then he’ll jilt us, you’ll
see.”

Such speeches, though they reached Vivian’s ear by the kind
officiousness of friends, were never made by Mr. Wharton so directly
that he could take hold of them; and Russell strenuously advised him
not to seek occasion to quarrel with a man who evidently desired only
to raise his own reputation by making Vivian angry, getting him in the
wrong, and forcing him into an imprudent duel.

“Let your actions continue to contradict his words, and they can never
injure you,” said Russell.

For some time Vivian adhered to his friend’s advice, and he proudly felt
the superiority of principle and character. But, alas! there was one
defence that his patriotism wanted--economy. Whilst he was thus active
in the public cause, and exulting in his disinterestedness, his private
affairs were getting into terrible disorder. The expense of building
his castle had increased beyond all his calculations--the expense of
his election--the money he had lost at play whilst he was in Wharton’s
society--the sums he had lent to Wharton--the money he had spent
abroad,--all these accumulated brought him to great difficulties: for
though his estate was considerable, yet it was so settled and tied
up that he could neither sell nor mortgage. His creditors became
clamorous--he had no means of satisfying or quieting them: an execution
was actually sent down to his castle, just as it was finished. Lady
Mary Vivian was in the greatest alarm and distress: she had no means of
extricating her son. As to his fashionable friends--no hopes from such
extravagant and selfish beings. What was to be done? At this critical
moment, the offers from _a certain quarter_ were renewed in another,
and, as it seemed, a more acceptable form,--a pension was proffered
instead of a title; and it was promised that the business should be so
managed, and the pension so held in another name, that nothing of the
transaction should transpire; and that his seceding from opposition
should be made to appear a change of sentiments from conviction, not
from interested motives. Vivian’s honourable feelings revolted from
these offers, and abhorred these subterfuges; but distress--pecuniary
distress! he had never before felt its pressure; he had never till
now felt how powerful, how compulsatory it is over even generous and
high-spirited souls. Whilst Vivian was thus oppressed with difficulties,
which his imprudence had brought upon him; whilst his mind was
struggling with opposing motives, he was, most fortunately for his
political integrity, relieved, partly by accident, and partly by
friendship. It happened that the incumbent of the rich living, of which
Vivian had the presentation, was dying just at this time; and Russell,
instead of claiming the living which Vivian had promised to him,
relinquished all pretensions to it, and insisted upon his friend’s
disposing of his right of presentation. The sum which this enabled
Vivian to raise was fully sufficient to satisfy the execution which had
been laid on his castle; and the less clamorous creditors were content
to be paid by instalments, annually, from his income. Thus he was saved
for the present; and he formed the most prudent resolves for the future.
He was most sincerely grateful to his disinterested friend. The full
extent of the sacrifice which Russell made him was not, however, known
at this time, nor for some years afterwards.

But, without anticipation, let us proceed with our story. Amongst those
fashionable and political friends with whom our hero had, since his
return to England, renewed his connexion, was my Lord Glistonbury. His
lordship, far from thinking the worse of him for _his affair_ with Mrs.
Wharton, spoke of it in modish _slang_, as “a new and fine feather in
his cap;” and he congratulated Vivian upon his having “carried off the
prize without paying the price.” Vivian’s success as a parliamentary
orator had still further endeared him to his lordship, who failed not to
repeat, that he had always prophesied Vivian would make a capital figure
in public life; that Vivian was his member, &c. At the recess, Lord
Glistonbury insisted upon carrying Vivian down to spend the holidays
with him at Glistonbury Castle.

“You must come, Vivian: so make your fellow put your worldly goods into
my barouche, which is at the door; and we are to have a great party at
Glistonbury, and private theatricals, and the devil knows what; and
you must see my little Julia act, and I must introduce you to _the
Rosamunda_. Come, come! you can’t refuse me!--Why, you have only a
bachelor’s castle of your own to go to; and that’s a dismal sort of
business, compared with what I have _in petto_ for you--‘the feast of
reason, and the flow of soul,’ in the first style, I assure you.
You must know, I always--even in the midst of the wildest of my wild
oats--had a taste for the belles-lettres, and philosophy, and the muses,
and the _literati,_ and so forth--always a touch of the Mecaenas about
me.--And now my boy’s growing up, it’s more particularly proper to bring
these sort of people about him; for, you know, clever men who have a
reputation can sound a flourish of trumpets advantageously before ‘a
Grecian youth of talents rare’ makes his appearance on the stage of
the great world--Ha! hey!--Is not this what one may call
prudence?--Ha!--Good to have a father who knows something of life, and
of books too, hey? Then, for my daughters, too--daughter, I mean; for
Lady Sarah’s Lady Glistonbury’s child: her ladyship and Miss Strictland
have manufactured her after their own taste and fashion; and I’ve
nothing to say to that--But my little Julia--Ah, I’ve got a different
sort of governess about her these few months past--not without family
battles, you may guess. But when Jupiter gives the nod, you know, even
Juno, stately as she is, must bend. So I have my Rosamunda for my little
Julia--who, by-the-bye, is no longer my _little_ Julia, but a prodigious
fine woman, as you shall see. But, all this time, is your fellow putting
your things up? No!--Hey? how? Oh, I understand your long face of
hesitation--you have not seen the ladies since the Wharton affair, and
you don’t know how they might look.--Never fear! Lady Glistonbury shall
do as I please, and look as I please. Besides, _entre nous_, I know she
hates the Whartons; so that her morality will have a loophole to creep
out of; and you’ll be safe and snug, whilst all the blame will be thrown
on them--Hey!--Oh, I understand things--pique myself on investigating
the human heart. Come, we have not a moment to lose; and you’ll have
your friend Russell, too--Come, come! to have and to hold, as the
lawyers say--”

Seizing Vivian’s arm, Lord Glistonbury carried him off before he had
half understood all his lordship had poured forth so rapidly; and before
he had decided whether he wished or not to accept of this invitation.




CHAPTER VIII.


On his way to Glistonbury Castle, Vivian had full leisure to repent of
having accepted of this invitation, recollecting, as he did, all the
former reports about himself and Lady Sarah Lidhurst. He determined,
therefore, that his visit should be as short as possible; and the chief
pleasure he promised himself was the society of his friend Russell.

On his arrival at the castle, he was told that Mr. Russell was out
riding; and that every body else was in the theatre at a rehearsal,
except Lady Glistonbury, the Lady Sarah, and Miss Strictland. He found
these three ladies sitting in form in the great deserted drawing-room,
each looking like a copy of the other, and all as if they were deploring
the degeneracy of the times. Vivian approached with due awe; but, to his
great surprise and relief, at his approach their countenances exhibited
some signs of life and satisfaction. Lord Glistonbury _presented_ him on his return
from abroad: Lady Glistonbury’s features relaxed to a smile, though she
seemed immediately to repent of it, and to feel it incumbent upon her to
maintain her rigidity of mien. Whilst she, and of course Miss Strictland
and the Lady Sarah, were thus embarrassed between the necessity of
reprobating the sin, and the desire of pleasing the sinner, Lord
Glistonbury ran on with one of his speeches, of borrowed sense and
original nonsense, and then would have carried him off to the rehearsal,
but Lady Glistonbury called Vivian back, begging, in her formal manner,
“that her lord would do her the favour to leave Mr. Vivian with her for
a few minutes, as it was so long since she had the pleasure of seeing
him at Glistonbury.” Vivian returned with as good a grace as he could;
and, to find means of breaking the embarrassing silence that ensued,
took up a book which lay upon the table, “Toplady’s Sermons”--no hope
of assistance from that: he had recourse to another--equally unlucky,
“Wesley’s Diary:” another--“The Pilgrim’s Progress.” He went no farther;
but, looking up, he perceived that the Lady Sarah was _motioned_ by her
august mother to leave the room. Vivian had again recourse to “Toplady.”

“Very unfashionable books, Mr. Vivian,” said Miss Strictland, bridling
and smiling as in scorn.

“Very unfashionable books!” repeated Lady Glistonbury, with the
same inflection of voice, and the same bridling and smiling. “Very
different,” continued her ladyship, “very different from what you have
been accustomed to see on _some_ ladies’ tables, no doubt, Mr. Vivian!
Without mentioning names, or alluding to transactions that ought to be
buried in eternal oblivion, and that are so very distressing to your
friends here to think of, sir, give me leave to ask, Mr. Vivian, whether
it be true what I have heard, that the prosecution, and every thing
relative to it, is entirely given up?”

“Entirely, madam.”

“Then,” said Lady Glistonbury, glancing her eye at Miss Strictland,
“_we_ may welcome Mr. Vivian with safe consciences to Glistonbury; and
since the affair will never become public, and since Lady Sarah knows
none of the improper particulars; and since she may, and, from her
education, naturally will, class all such things under the head of
impossibilities and false reports, of which people, in our rank of life
especially, are subject every hour to hear so many; there cannot, as I
am persuaded you will agree with me in thinking, Miss Strictland, be any
impropriety in our and Lady Sarah’s receiving Mr. Vivian again on the
same footing as formerly.”

Miss Strictland bowed her formal assent: Vivian bowed, because he saw
that a bow was expected from him; and then he pondered on what might be
meant by the words, _on the same footing as formerly_; and he had just
framed a clause explanatory and restrictive of the same, when he was
interrupted by the sound of laughter, and of numerous, loud, and mingled
voices, coming along the gallery that led to the drawing-room. As
if these were signals for her departure, and as if she dreaded the
intrusion and contamination of the revel rout, Lady Glistonbury arose,
looked at her watch, pronounced her belief that it was full time for her
to go to dress, and retired through a Venetian door, followed by Miss
Strictland, repeating the same belief, and bearing her ladyship’s
tapestry work: her steps quickened as the door at the opposite end of
the room opened; and, curtsying (an unnecessary apology to Mr. Vivian)
as she passed, she left him _to himself_. And now,

     “He sees a train profusely gay,
     Come pranckling o’er the place.”

Some were dressed for comic, some for tragic characters; but all seemed
equally gay, and talked equally fast. There had been a dressed rehearsal
of “The Fair Penitent,” and of “The Romp;” and all the spectators and
all the actors were giving and receiving exuberant compliments. Vivian
knew many of the party,--some of them bel-esprits, some fashionable
amateurs; all pretenders to notoriety, either as judges or performers.
In the midst of this motley group, there was one figure who stood
receiving and expecting universal homage: she was dressed as “The Fair
Penitent;” but her affected vivacity of gesture and countenance was in
striking contrast to her tragic attire; and Vivian could hardly forbear
smiling at the _minauderies_ with which she listened and talked to the
gentlemen round her; now languishing, now coquetting; rolling her eyes,
and throwing herself into a succession of studied attitudes, dealing
repartees to this side and to that; and, in short, making the greatest
possible exhibition both of her person and her mind.

“Don’t you know her? Did you never see her before?--No!
you’ve been out of England; but you’ve heard of her,
certainly?--_Rosamunda_,”--whispered Lord Glistonbury to Vivian.

“And who is Rosamunda?” said Vivian; “an actress.”

“Actress!--Hush!--Bless you! no--but the famous poetess. Is it possible
that you hav’n’t read the poems of Rosamunda?--They were in every body’s
hands a few months ago; but you were abroad--better engaged, or as well,
hey? But, as I was going to tell you, that’s the reason she’s called
_The Rosamunda_--I gave her the name, for I patronized her from the
first. Her real name is Bateman; and Lady Glistonbury and her set call
her Miss Bateman still, but nobody else. She’s an amazing clever
woman, I assure you--more genius than any of ‘em since the time of
Rousseau!--Devil of a salary!--and devil of a battle I had to fight with
some of my friends before I could fix her here; but I was determined I
would follow my own ideas in Julia’s education. Lady Glistonbury had
her way and her routine with Lady Sarah; and it’s all very well, vastly
well--

     ‘Virtue for her too painful an endeavour,
     Content to dwell in decencies for ever.’

You know the sort of thing! Yes, yes; but I was not content to have my
Julia lost among the _mediocres_, as I call them: so I took her out of
Miss Strictland’s hands; and the Rosamunda’s her governess.”

“Her governess!” repeated Vivian, with uncontrollable astonishment;
“Lady Julia Lidhurst’s governess!”

“Yes, you may well be surprised,” pursued Lord Glistonbury, mistaking
the cause of the surprise: “no one in England could have done it but
myself; she refused innumerable applications,--immense offers; and,
after all, you know, she does not appear as governess _titrée_--only
as a friend of the family, who directs Lady Julia Lidhurst’s literary
talents. Oh, you understand, a man of the world knows how to manage
these things--sacrifices always to the vanity of the sex, or the
pride, as the case may be, I never mind names, but things, as the
metaphysicians say--distinguish betwixt essentials and accidents--sound
philosophy that, hey? And, thank Heaven! a gentleman or a nobleman need
not apologize in these days for talking of philosophy before ladies,
even if any body overheard us, which, as it happens, I believe nobody
does. So let me, now that _you know your Paris_, introduce you to ‘The
Rosamunda.’--Mr. Vivian--the Rosamunda. Rosamunda--Mr. Vivian.”

After Vivian had for a few minutes acted audience, very little to his
own satisfaction, he was relieved by Lord Glistonbury’s exclaiming, “But
Julia! where’s Julia all this time?”

Rosamunda looked round, with the air of one interrupted by a frivolous
question which requires no answer; but some one less exalted, and more
attentive to the common forms of civility, told his lordship that Lady
Julia was in the gallery with her brother. Lord Glistonbury hurried
Vivian into the gallery. He was struck the moment he met Lady Julia
with the great change and improvement in her appearance. Instead of the
childish girl he had formerly seen flying about, full only of the frolic
of the present moment, he now saw a fine graceful woman with a striking
countenance that indicated both genius and sensibility. She was talking
to her brother with so much eagerness, that she did not see Vivian come
into the gallery; and, as he walked on towards the farther end, where
she was standing, he had time to admire her.

“A fine girl, faith! though she is my daughter,” whispered Lord
Glistonbury; “and would you believe that she is only sixteen?”

“Only sixteen!”

“Ay: and stay till you talk to her--stay till you hear her--you will be
more surprised. Such genius! such eloquence! She’s my own girl. Well,
Julia, my darling!” cried he, raising his voice, “in the clouds, as
usual?”

Lady Julia started--but it was a natural, not a theatric
start--colouring at the consciousness of her own absence of mind. She
came forward with a manner that apologized better than words could do,
and she received Mr. Vivian so courteously, and with such ingenuous
pleasure in her countenance, that he began to rejoice in having accepted
the invitation to Glistonbury; at the same instant, he recollected a
look which his mother had given him when he first saw Lady Julia on the
terrace of the castle.

“Well, what was she saying to you, Lidhurst? hey! my boy?”

“We were arguing, sir.”

“Arguing! Ay, ay, she’s the devil for that!--words at will!--‘Persuasive
words, and more persuasive sighs!’ Ah, woman! woman for ever! always
talking us out of our senses! and which of the best of us would not
wish it to be so? ‘Oh! let me, let me be deceived!’ is the cream of
philosophy, epicurean and stoic--at least, that’s my creed. But to the
point: what was it about that she was holding forth so charmingly--a
book or a lover? A book, I’ll wager: she’s such a romantic little
fool, and so unlike other women: leaves all her admirers there in the
drawing-room, and stays out here, talking over musty books with her
brother. But come, what was the point? I will have it argued again
before me--Let’s see the book.”

Lord Lidhurst pointed out a speech in “The Fair Penitent,” and said that
they had been debating about the manner in which it should be recited.
Lord Glistonbury called upon his daughter to repeat it: she showed
a slight degree of unaffected timidity at first; but when her
father stamped and bid her let him see no vulgar bashfulness, she
obeyed--recited charmingly--and, when urged by a little opposition from
her brother, grew warm in defence of her own opinion--displayed in its
support such sensibility, with such a flow of eloquence, accompanied
with such animated and graceful, yet natural gesture, that Vivian was
transported with sudden admiration. He was astonished at this early
development of feeling and intellect; and if, in the midst of his
delight, he felt some latent disapprobation of this display of talent
from so young a woman, yet he quickly justified her to himself, by
saying that he was not a stranger; that he had formerly been received
by her family on a footing of intimacy. Then he observed farther, in her
vindication, that there was not the slightest affectation or coquetry in
any of her words or motions; that she spoke with this eagerness not to
gain admiration, but because she was carried away by her enthusiasm,
and, thoughtless of herself, was eager only to persuade and to make
her opinions prevail. Such was the enchantment of her eloquence and her
beauty, that after a quarter of an hour spent in her company, our hero
did not know whether to wish that she had more sedateness and reserve,
or to rejoice that she was so animated and natural. Before he could
decide this point, his friend Russell returned from riding. After the
first greetings were over, Russell drew him aside, and asked, “Pray, my
dear Vivian, what brings you here?”

“Lord Glistonbury--to whom I had not time to say no, he talked so fast.
But, after all, why should I say no? I am a free man--a discarded lover.
I am absolutely convinced that Selina Sidney’s refusal will never be
retracted; my mother, I know, is of that opinion. You suggested, that
if I distinguished myself in public life, and showed steadiness, I might
recover her esteem and affection; but I see no chance of it. My mother
showed me her last letter--no hopes from that--so I think it would
be madness, or folly, to waste my time, and wear out my feelings, in
pursuit of a woman, who, however amiable, is lost to me.”

“Of that you are the best judge,” said Russell, gravely. “I am far from
wishing--from urging you to waste your time. Lady Mary Vivian must know
more of Miss Sidney, and be better able to judge of the state of her
heart than I can be. It would not be the part of a friend to excite you
to persevere in a pursuit that would end in disappointment; but
this much, before we quit the subject for ever, I feel it my duty to
say--that I think Miss Sidney the woman of all others the best suited to
your character, the most deserving of your love, the most calculated to
make you exquisitely and permanently happy.”

“All that’s very true,” said Vivian, impatiently; “but, since I can’t
have her, why make me miserable about her?”

“Am I to understand,” resumed Russell, after a long pause, “am I to
understand that, now you have regained your freedom, you come here with
the settled purpose of espousing the Lady Sarah Lidhurst?”

“Heaven forfend!” cried Vivian, starting back.

“Then I am to go over again, on this subject, with indefatigable
patience and in due logical order, all the arguments, moral, prudential,
and conventional, which I had the labour of laying before you about a
twelvemonth ago.”

“Save yourself the trouble, my dear friend!” said Vivian; “I shall set
all that upon a right footing immediately, by speaking of the report
at once to some of the family. I was going to _rise to explain_
this morning, when I was with Lady Glastonbury; but I felt a sort of
delicacy--it was an awkward time--and at that moment somebody came into
the room.”

“Ay,” said Russell, “you are just like the hero of a novel, stopped from
saying what he ought to say by somebody’s coming into the room.--Awkward
time! Take care you don’t sacrifice yourself at last to these
_awkwardnesses_ and this sort of _delicacies_. I have still my fears
that you will get into difficulties about Lady Sarah.”

Vivian could not help laughing at what he called his friend’s absurd
fears.

“If you are determined, my dear Russell, at all events to fear for me,
I’ll suggest to you a more reasonable cause of dread. Suppose I should
fall desperately in love with Lady Julia!--I assure you there’s
some danger of that. She is really very handsome and very graceful;
uncommonly clever and eloquent--as to the rest, you know her--what is
she?”

“All that you have said, and more. She has more genius and more sensibility,
than I have ever before seen in a girl of her age. She might be made any thing--every
thing; an ornament to her sex--an honour to her country--were she
under the guidance of persons fit to direct great powers and a noble
character; but I dare not predict what will become of her, under the
mismanagement of those, to whom she is at present abandoned. With the
education she has undergone, and that to which she is now exposed, one having
controlled her in every, even the most innocent, thought and action;
the other suddenly setting her free from all restraints, even from those
the most rational and necessary to her sex and society. I say she must be
something more than female, more than human, to be safe. No man of prudence
would venture to insure a woman running such risks. Almost in proportion to
her abilities is her peril, because in the same proportion is her confidence
in herself. I admire lady Julia's talents more than you do, because I know them
better; and, farther still, her amiable dispoition, her precarious situation,
her youth, her innocence and inexperience, have altogether strongly interested
me in her fate; and yet I cannot, Vivian, as your friend, recommend her to
you as a wife.”

“I am not thinking of her as a wife,” said Vivian: “I have not had time
to think of her at all yet. But you said, just now, that in good hands
she might be made every thing that is good and great. Why not by a
husband, instead of a governess? and would not you call mine _good
hands_?”

“Good, but not steady--not at all the husband fit to guide such a woman.
He must be a man not only of superior sense, but of superior strength of
mind.”

Vivian was piqued by this remark, and proceeded to compare the fitness
of his character to _such_ a character as Lady Julia’s. Every moment he
showed more curiosity to hear further particulars of her disposition; of
the different characters of her governesses, and of all her relations;
but Russell refused to say more. He had told him what he was called
upon, as his friend, to reveal; he left the rest to Vivian’s own
observation and judgment. Vivian set himself to work to observe and
judge with all his might.

He soon perceived that all Russell had told him of the mismanagement of
Lady Julia’s education was true. In this house there were two parties,
each in extremes, and each with their systems and practice carried to
the utmost excess. The partisans of the old and the new school were here
to be seen at daggers-drawing. Lady Glastonbury, abhorrent of what
she termed modern philosophy, and classing under that name almost
all science and literature, especially all attempts to cultivate the
understanding of women, had, with the assistance of her _double_, Miss
Strictland, brought up Lady Sarah in all the ignorance and all the
rigidity of the most obsolete of the old school; she had made Lady Sarah
precisely like herself; with virtue, stiff, dogmatical, and repulsive;
with religion, gloomy and puritanical; with manners, cold and automatic.
In the course of eighteen years, whilst Lady Glistonbury went on, like
clock-work, the same round, punctual to the letter but unfeeling of the
spirit of her duties, she contrived, even by the wearisome method of her
_minuted_ diary of education, to make her house odious to her husband.
Some task, or master, or hour of lesson, continually, and immitigably
plagued him: he went abroad for amusement, and found dissipation.
Thus, by her unaccommodating temper, and the obstinacy of her manifold
virtues, she succeeded in alienating the affections of her husband. In
despair he one day exclaimed,

     “Ah que de vertus vous me faites haïr;”

and, repelled by virtue in this ungracious form, he flew to more
attractive vice. Finding that he could not have any comfort or solace
in the society of his wife, he sought consolation in the company of a
mistress. Lady Glistonbury had, in the mean time, her consolation
in being a pattern-wife; and in hearing that at card-tables it was
universally said, that Lord Glistonbury was the worst of husbands, and
that her ladyship was extremely to be pitied. In process of time, Lord
Glistonbury was driven to his home again by the united torments of a
virago mistress and the gout. It was at this period that he formed the
notion of being at once a political leader and a Mecaenas; and it was
at this period that he became acquainted with both his daughters, and
determined that his Julia should never resemble the Lady Sarah. He saw
his own genius in Julia; and he resolved, as he said, to give her fair
play, and to make her one of the wonders of the age. After some months’
counteraction and altercation, Lord Glistonbury, with a high hand, took
_his_ daughter from under the control of Miss Strictland; and, in spite
of all the representations, prophecies, and denunciations of her mother,
consigned Julia to the care of a governess after his own heart--a Miss
Bateman; or, as he called her, _The Rosamunda_. From the moment this
lady was introduced into the family there was an irreconcileable breach
between the husband and wife. Lady Glistonbury was perfectly in the
right in her dread of such a governess as Miss Bateman for her daughter
but she did not take the means to prevent the evil: her remonstrances
were too acrimonious; her objections too absolute; she made no
distinction between the use and abuse of reason and literature.
Her ladyship was only partially and accidentally right: right in point
of fact, but wrong in the general principle; for she objected to Miss
Bateman, as being of the class of literary women; to her real faults,
her inordinate love of admiration, and romantic imprudence, Lady
Glistonbury did not object, because she did not at first know them; and
when she did, she considered them but as necessary consequences of
the _cultivation and enlargement of Miss Bateman’s understanding_. “No
wonder!” her ladyship would say; “I knew it must be so; I knew it could
not be otherwise. All those clever women, as they are called, are the
same. This _comes_ of literature and literary ladies.”

Thus moralizing in private with Miss Strictland and her own small party,
Lady Glistonbury appeared silent and passive before her husband and
his adherents. After prophesying how it all must end in the ruin of her
daughter Julia, she declared that she would never speak on this subject
again: she showed herself ready, with maternal resignation, and in
silent obduracy, to witness the completion of the sacrifice of her
devoted child.

Lord Glistonbury was quite satisfied with having silenced opposition.
His new governess, established in her office, and with full and
unlimited powers, went on triumphant and careless of her charge; she
thought of little but displaying her own talents in company. The castle
was consequently filled with crowds of amateurs; novels and plays were
the order of the day; and a theatre was fitted up, all in open defiance
of poor Lady Glistonbury. The daughter commenced her new course of
education by being taught to laugh at her mother’s prejudices. Such was
the state of affairs when Vivian commenced his observations; and all
this secret history he learnt by scraps, and hints, and inuendoes, from
very particular friends of both parties--friends who were not troubled
with any of Mr. Russell’s scruples or discretion.

Vivian’s attention was now fixed upon Lady Julia; he observed with
satisfaction, that, notwithstanding her governess’s example and
excitement, Lady Julia did not show any exorbitant desire for
general admiration; and that her manners were free from coquetry and
affectation: she seemed rather to disdain the flattery, and to avoid
both the homage and the company of men who were her inferiors in mental
qualifications; she addressed her conversation principally to Vivian and
his friend Russell; with them, indeed, she conversed a great deal,
with much eagerness and enthusiasm, expressing all her opinions without
disguise, and showing on most occasions more imagination than reason,
and more feeling than judgment. Vivian perceived that it was soon
suspected by many of their observers, and especially by Lady Glistonbury
and the Lady Sarah, that Julia had a design upon his heart; but he
plainly discerned that she had no design whatever to captivate him; and
that though she gave him so large a share of her company, it was without
thinking of him as a lover: he saw that she conversed with him and Mr.
Russell, preferably to others, because they spoke on subjects which
interested her more; and because they drew out her brother, of whom
she was very fond. Her being capable, at so early an age, to appreciate
Russell’s character and talents; her preferring his solid sense and his
plain sincerity to the brilliancy, the _fashion_, and even the gallantry
of all the men whom her father had now collected round her, appeared
to Vivian the most unequivocal proof of the superiority of her
understanding and of the goodness of her disposition. On various
occasions, he marked with delight the deference she paid to his friend’s
opinion, and the readiness with which she listened to reason from
him--albeit unused and averse from reason in general. Impatient as
she was of control, and confident, both in her own powers and in her
instinctive moral sense (about which, by-the-bye, she talked a great
deal of eloquent nonsense), yet a word or a look from Mr. Russell would
reclaim her in her highest flights. Soon after Vivian commenced his
observations upon this interesting subject, he saw an instance of what
Russell had told him of the ease with which Lady Julia might be guided
by a man of sense and strength of mind.

The tragedy of “The Fair Penitent,” Calista by Miss Bateman, was
represented with vast applause to a brilliant audience at the
Glistonbury theatre. The same play was to be reacted a week afterwards
to a fresh audience--it was proposed that Vivian should play Lothario,
and that Lady Julia should play Calista: Miss Bateman saw no objection
to this proposal: Lord Glistonbury might, perhaps, have had the parental
prudence to object to his daughter’s appearing in public at her age,
in such a character, before a mixed audience: but, unfortunately, Lady
Glistonbury bursting from her silence at this critical moment, said so
much, and in such a prosing and puritanical manner, not only against her
daughter’s acting in this play, and in these circumstances, but against
all _stage plays_, playwrights, actors, and actresses whatsoever,
denouncing and anathematizing them all indiscriminately; that
immediately Lord Glistonbury laughed--Miss Bateman took fire--and it
became a trial of power between the contending parties. Lady Julia, who
had but lately escaped from the irksomeness of her mother’s injudicious
and minute control, dreaded, above all things, to be again subjected
to her and Miss Strictland; therefore, without considering the real
propriety or impropriety of the point in question, without examining
whether Miss Bateman was right or wrong in the licence she had granted,
Lady Julia supported her opinion warmly; and, with all her eloquence, at
once asserted her own liberty, and defended the cause of the theatre
in general. She had heard Mr. Russell once speak of the utility of
a well-regulated public stage; of the influence of good theatric
representations in forming the taste and rousing the soul to virtue: he
had shown her Marmontel’s celebrated letter to Rousseau on this subject;
consequently, she thought she knew what his opinion must be on
the present occasion: therefore she spoke with more than her usual
confidence and enthusiasm. Her eloquence and her abilities transported
her father and most of her auditors, Vivian among the rest, with
astonishment and admiration: she enjoyed, at this moment, what the
French call _un grand succès_; but, in the midst of the buzz of
applause, Vivian observed that her eye turned anxiously upon Russell,
who stood silent, and with a disapproving countenance.

“I am sure your friend, Mr. Russell, is displeased at this instant--and
with me.--I must know why.--Let us ask him.--Do bring him here.”

Immediately she disengaged herself from all her admirers, and, making
room for Mr. Russell beside her, waited, as she said, to hear from him
_ses vérités_. Russell would have declined speaking, but her ladyship
appealed earnestly and urgently for his opinion, saying, “Who will speak
the truth to me if you will not? On whose judgment can I rely if not
on yours?--You direct my brother’s mind to every thing that is wise and
good; direct mine: I am as desirous to do right as he can be: and you
will find me--self-willed and volatile, as I know you think me--you will
find me a docile pupil. Then tell me frankly--did I, just now, speak too
much or too warmly? I thought I was speaking your sentiments, and that I
_must_ be right. But perhaps it was not right for a woman, or so young
a woman as I am, to support even just opinions so resolutely. And yet
is it a crime to be young?--And is the honour of maintaining truth to
be monopolized by age?--No, surely; for Mr. Russell himself has not that
claim to stand forth, as he so often does, in its defence. And is it
unbecoming for a woman to do that, which is in itself excellent and honourable?
Oh, yes! I anticipate your answer; you like retiring rather than intrepid
sense in our sex. -- I recollect the line you once quoted:

    'There is no woman, where there's no reserve'

How I wish that I had those reserved manners, of which you approve! If you think
that I ought not to act Calista; if you think that I had better not
appear on the stage at all, only say so!--All I ask is your opinion; the
advantage of your judgment. And you see, Mr. Vivian, how difficult it is
to obtain it!--But his friend, probably, never felt this difficulty!”

With a degree of sober composure, which almost provoked Vivian, Mr.
Russell answered this animated lady. And with a sincerity which,
though politely shown, Vivian thought severe and almost cruel, Russell
acknowledged that her ladyship had anticipated some, but not all of his
objections. He represented that she had failed in becoming respect to
her mother, in thus publicly attacking and opposing her opinions, even
supposing them to be ill-founded; and declared that, as to the case in
discussion, he was entirely of Lady Glistonbury’s opinion, that it would
be unfit and injurious to a young lady to exhibit herself, even on a
private stage, in the character in which it had been proposed that Lady
Julia should appear. He explained, with as much delicacy as he could,
the censures which a young woman might incur, and the dangers to which
private theatricals may lead, where the _company_ is so little select
as it was at the time at the Glistonbury theatre.

Whilst Russell spoke, Vivian was charmed with the manner in which Lady
Julia listened: he thought her countenance enchantingly beautiful,
alternately softened as it was by the expression of genuine humility,
and radiant with candour and gratitude. She made no reply, but
immediately went to her mother; and, in the most engaging manner
acknowledged that she had been wrong, and declared that she was
convinced it would be improper for her to act the character she had
proposed. With that cold haughtiness of mien, the most repulsive to
a warm and generous mind, the mother turned to her daughter, and said
that, for her part, she had no faith in sudden conversions, and starts
of good conduct made little impression upon her; that, as far as she
was herself concerned, she forgave, as in charity it became her, all
the undutiful insolence with which she had been treated; that, as to
the rest, she was glad to find, for Lady Julia’s own sake, that she had
given up her strange, and, as she must say, _scandalous_ intentions.
“However,” added Lady Glistonbury, “I am not so sanguine as to consider
this as any thing but a respite from ruin; I am not so credulous as to
believe in sudden reformations; nor, despicable as you and my lord do
me the honour to think my understanding--am I to be made the dupe of a
little deceitful fondling!”

Julia withdrew her arms, which she had thrown round her mother; and Miss
Strictland, after breaking her netting silk with a jerk of indignation,
observed, that, for her part, she wondered young ladies should go to
consult their brother’s tutor, instead of more suitable, and, perhaps,
as competent advisers. Lady Julia, now indignant, turned away, and was
withdrawing from before the triumvirate, when Lady Sarah, who had sat
looking, even more stiff and constrained than usual, suddenly broke from
her stony state, and, springing forward, exclaimed, “Stay, Julia!--Stay,
my dear sister!--Oh, Miss Strictland! do my sister justice!--When Julia
is so candid, so eager to do right, intercede for her with my mother!”

“First, may I presume to ask,” said Miss Strictland, drawing herself up
with starch malice; “first, may I presume to ask, whether Mr. Vivian,
upon this occasion, declined to act Lothario?”

“Miss Strictland, you do not do my sister justice!” cried Lady Sarah:
“Miss Strictland, you are wrong--very wrong!”

Miss Strictland, for a moment struck dumb with astonishment, opening
her eyes as far as they could open, stared at Lady Sarah, and, after
a pause, exclaimed, “Lady Sarah! I protest I never saw any thing that
surprised me so much in my whole life!----Wrong!--very wrong!--I?----My
Lady Glistonbury, I trust your ladyship----”

Lady Glistonbury, at this instant, showed, by a little involuntary
shake of her head, that she was inwardly perturbed: Lady Sarah,
throwing herself upon her knees before her mother, exclaimed,
“Oh, madam!--mother! forgive me if I failed in respect to Miss
Strictland!----But, my sister! my sister----!”

“Rise, Sarah, rise!” said Lady Glistonbury, pulling asunder lady Sarah's
supplicating hands; “that is not a fit
attitude!--And you are wrong, very wrong, to fail in respect to Miss
Strictland, my second self, Sarah. Lady Julia Lidhurst, it is you who
are the cause of this--the only failure of duty your sister ever was
guilty of towards me in the whole course of her life--I beg of you to
withdraw, and leave me my daughter Sarah.”

“At least, I have found a sister, and when I most wanted it,” said Lady
Julia. “I always suspected you loved me, but I never knew how much till
this moment,” added she, turning to embrace her sister; but Lady Sarah
had now resumed her stony appearance, and, standing motionless, received
her sister’s embrace without sign of life or feeling.

“Lady Julia Lidhurst,” said Miss Strictland, “you humble yourself in
vain: I think your mother, my Lady Glistonbury, requested of you to
leave your sister, Lady Sarah, to us, and to her duty.”

“Duty!” repeated Lady Julia, her eyes flashing indignation: “Is this
what you call _duty_?--Never will I humble myself before you again--I
_will_ leave you--I do leave you--now and for ever--DUTY!”

She withdrew:--and thus was lost one of the fairest occasions
of confirming a young and candid mind in prudent and excellent
dispositions. After humbling herself in vain before a mother, this poor
young lady was now to withstand a father’s reproaches; and, after the
inexorable Miss Strictland, she was to encounter the exasperated Miss
Bateman. Whether the Gorgon terrors of one governess, or the fury
passions of the other, were most formidable, it was difficult to decide.
Miss Bateman had written an epilogue for Lady Julia to recite in the
character of Calista; and, with the combined irritability of authoress
and governess, she was enraged at the idea of her pupil’s declining to
repeat these favourite lines. Lord Glistonbury cared not for the lines;
but, considering his own authority to be impeached by his daughter’s
resistance, he treated _his Julia_ as a traitor to his cause, and a
rebel to his party. It was in vain, that Mr. Russell endeavoured to
reason with his lordship: there was nothing his lordship understood
so little, or hated so much, as reason: he looked upon it indeed,
as an affront to his understanding, that anyone one should talk
of reason to him; for he considered his tact, upon all subjects, as
infallible, and, as his lordship said to Mr. Russell --

'Sir, -- when a gentleman or a nobleman has made up his opinions,
what is the use of reasoning with him, since that is only saying, in
other words, that your reason his right, and his wrong, which is an
insult to a rational being's understanding, that no man of any talent
would willingly receive, and which, I conceive, no man of any politeness
would willingly offer. Besides that, really, a member of either house,'
added his lordship, with a supercilliously facetious smile, 'really,
a member of either house has such a surfeit of debating, in his country's
service, that, upon honour, sir, I think he may, during a recess, be
allowed an exemption from all arguments and reasoning whatsoever --
miles emeritus, Sir! You, who are a scholar, understand the force of
my apology; and, at all events, I will have my daughter Julia obey
me, and play Calista -- meo periculo.'

Russell had no right to interfere farther; but lady Julia was resolute
in declining to play Calista.

But Lady Julia was resolute in declining to play Calista; and Vivian
admired the spirit and steadiness of her resistance to the solicitations
and the flattery with which she was assailed by the numerous hangers-on
of the family, and by the amateurs assembled at Glistonbury. Russell,
who knew the warmth of her temper, however, dreaded that she should
pass the bounds of propriety in the contest with her father and her
governess; and he almost repented having given any advice upon the
subject. The contest happily terminated in Lord Glistonbury’s having a
violent fit of the gout, which, as the newspapers informed the public,
“ended for the season the Christmas hospitalities and theatrical
festivities at Glistonbury Castle!”

Whilst his lordship suffered this fit of torture, his daughter Julia
attended him with so much patience and affection, that he forgave
her for not being willing to be Calista; and, upon his recovery, he
announced to Miss Bateman that it was his will and pleasure that his
daughter Julia should do as she liked on this point, but that he desired
it to be understood that this was no concession to Lady Glistonbury’s
prejudices, but an act of his own pure grace.

To celebrate his recovery, his lordship determined to give a ball; and
Miss Bateman persuaded him to make it a _fancy ball_. In this family,
unfortunately, every occurrence, even every proposal of amusement,
became a subject of dispute and a source of misery. Lady Glistonbury,
as soon as her lord announced his intention of giving this fancy ball,
declined taking the direction of an entertainment which approached,
she said, too near to the nature of a masquerade to meet her ideas of
propriety. Lord Glistonbury laughed, and tried the powers of ridicule
and wit:

    'But on th’impassive ice the lightnings play’d.'

-- To reason, also, lord Glistonbury had now recourse; and forgetful
of his late abjuration of it's authority, complained, that it was
a very strange thing, that it was impossible to bring lady Glistonbury
ever to listen to reason on any one subject -- _even on a point of taste._

The lady’s cool obstinacy was fully a match for her lord’s petulance: to
all he could urge, she repeated, “that such entertainments did not meet
her ideas of propriety.” Her ladyship, Lady Sarah, and Miss Strictland,
consequently declared it to be their resolution, “to appear in their own
proper characters, and their own proper dresses, and no others.”

These three rigid seceders excepted, all the world at Glistonbury
Castle, and within its sphere of attraction, were occupied with
preparations for this ball. Miss Bateman was quite in her element,
flattered and flattering, consulting and consulted, in the midst
of novels, plays, and poetry, prints, and pictures, searching for
appropriate characters and dresses. This preceptress seemed to think
and to expect that others should deem her office of governess merely a
subordinate part of her business: she considered her having accepted
of the superintendence of the education of Lady Julia Lidhurst as a
prodigious condescension on her part, and a derogation from her rank
and pretensions in the literary and fashionable world; a peculiar and
sentimental favour to Lord Glistonbury, of which his lordship was bound
in honour to show his sense, by treating her as a member of his family,
not only with distinguished politeness, but by _deferring_ to her
opinion in all things, so as to prove to her satisfaction that she was
considered _only_ as a friend, and not at all as a governess. Thus she
was raised as much above that station in the family in which she could
be useful, as governesses in other houses have been sometimes depressed
below their proper rank. Upon this, as upon all occasions, Miss Bateman
was the first person to be thought of--her character and her dress were
the primary points to be determined; and they were points of no
easy decision, she having proposed for herself no less than five
characters--the fair Rosamond, Joan of Arc, Cleopatra, Sigismunda, and
Circe. After minute consideration of the dresses, which, at a fancy
ball, were to constitute these characters, fair Rosamond was rejected,
“because the old English dress muffled up the person too much; Joan of
Arc would find her armour inconvenient for dancing; Cleopatra’s diadem
and royal purple would certainly be truly becoming, but then her regal
length of train was as inadmissible in a dancing-dress as Joan of
Arc’s armour.” Between Sigismunda and Circe, Miss Bateman’s choice long
vibrated. The Spanish and the Grecian costume had each its claims on her
favour: for she was assured they both became her remarkably. Vivian was
admitted to the consultation: he was informed that there must be both a
Circe and a Sigismunda; and that Lady Julia was to take whichever of
the two characters Miss Bateman declined. Pending the deliberation, Lady
Julia whispered to Vivian, “For mercy’s sake! contrive that I may not be
doomed to be Circe; for Circe is no better than Calista.”

Vivian was charmed with her ladyship’s delicacy and discretion; he
immediately decided her governess, by pointing out the beautiful
head-dress of Flaxman’s Circe, and observing that Miss Bateman’s hair
(which was a wig) might easily be arranged, so as to produce the
same effect. Lady Julia rewarded Vivian for this able and successful
manoeuvre by one of her sweetest smiles. Her smiles had now powerful
influence over his heart. He rebelled against Russell’s advice, to take
more time to consider how far his character was suited to hers: he was
conscious, indeed, that it would be more prudent to wait a little longer
before he should declare his passion, as Lady Julia was so very young
and enthusiastic, and as her education had been so ill managed; but he
argued that the worse her education, and the more imprudent the
people about her, the greater was her merit in conducting herself with
discretion, and in trying to restrain her natural enthusiasm. Russell
acknowledged this, and gave all due praise to Lady Julia; yet still he
represented that Vivian had been acquainted with her so short time that
he could not be a competent judge of her temper and disposition, even
if his judgment were cool; but it was evident that his passions were now
engaged warmly in her favour. All that Russell urged for delay so far
operated, however, upon Vivian, that he adopted a half measure, and
determined to try what chance he might have of pleasing her before he
should either declare his love to her ladyship, or make his proposal to
her father. A favourable opportunity soon occurred. On the day appointed
for the fancy ball, the young Lord Lidhurst, who was to be Tancred, was
taken ill of a feverish complaint: he was of a very weakly constitution,
and his friends were much alarmed by his frequent indispositions. His
physicians ordered quiet; he was confined to his own apartment; and
another Tancred was of course to be sought for: Vivian ventured to offer
to assume the character; and his manner, when he made this proposal
to his fair Sigismunda, though it was intended to be merely polite and
gallant, was so much agitated, that she now, for the first time,
seemed to perceive the state of his heart. Colouring high, her ladyship
answered, with hesitation unusual to her, “that she believed--she
fancied--that is, she understood from her brother--that he had deputed
Mr. Russell to represent Tancred in his place.”

Vivian was not displeased by this answer: the change of colour and
evident embarrassment appeared to him favourable omens; and he thought
that whether the embarrassment arose from unwillingness to let any man
but her brother’s tutor, a man domesticated in the family, appear as her
Tancred, or whether she was afraid of offending Mr. Russell, by changing
the arrangement her brother had made; in either case Vivian felt ready,
though a man in love, to approve of her motives. As to the rest, he was
certain that Russell would decline the part assigned him; and, as Vivian
expected, Russell came in a few minutes to resign his pretensions, or
rather to state that though Lord Lidhurst had proposed it, he had never
thought of accepting the honour; and that he should, in all probability,
not appear at the ball, because he was anxious to stay as much as
possible with Lord Lidhurst, whose indisposition increased instead of
abating. Lord Glistonbury, after this explanation, came in high spirits,
and with much satisfaction in his countenance and manner, said he
was happy to hear that his Sigismunda was to have Mr. Vivian for her
Tancred. So far all was prosperous to our hero’s hopes.

But when he saw Lady Julia again, which was not till dinner time, he
perceived an unfavourable alteration in her manner; not the timidity
or embarrassment of a girl who is uncertain whether she is or is not
pleased, or whether she should or should not appear to be pleased by the
first approaches of a new lover; but there was in her manner a decided
haughtiness, and an unusual air of displeasure and reserve. Though he
sat beside her, and though in general her delightful conversation had
been addressed either to him or Mr. Russell, they were now both deprived
of this honour; whatever she said, and all she said, was unlike herself,
was directed to persons opposite to her, even to the captain, the
lawyer, and the family parasites, whose existence she commonly seemed
to forget. She ate as well as spoke in a hurried manner, and as if in
defiance of her feelings. Whilst the courses were changing, she
turned towards Mr. Vivian, and after a rapid examining glance at his
countenance, she said, in a low voice--“You must think me, Mr. Vivian,
very unreasonable and whimsical, but I have given up all thoughts of
being Sigismunda. Will you oblige me so far as not to appear in
the dress of Tancred to-night? You will thus spare me all farther
difficulty. You know my mother and sister have declared their
determination not to wear any fancy dress; and though my father is
anxious that I should, I believe it may be best that, in this instance,
I follow my own judgment.--May I expect that you will oblige me?”

Vivian declared his entire submission to her ladyship’s judgment: and
he now was delighted to be able to forgive her for all seeming caprice;
because he thought he saw an amiable motive for her conduct--the wish
not to displease her mother, and not to excite the jealousy of her
sister.

The hour when the ball was to commence arrived; the room filled with
company; and Vivian, who flattered himself with the pleasure of dancing
all night with Lady Julia, as the price of his prompt obedience, looked
round the room in search of his expected partner, but he searched
in vain. He looked to the door at every new entrance--no Lady Julia
appeared. Circe, indeed, was every where to be seen and heard, and an
uglier Circe never touched this earth; but she looked happily confident
in the power of her charms. Whilst she was intent upon fascinating
Vivian, he was impatiently waiting for a moment’s intermission of her
volubility, that he might ask what had become of Lady Julia.

“Lady Julia?--She’s somewhere in the room, I suppose.--Oh! no: I
remember, she told me she would go and sit a quarter of an hour with her
brother. She will soon make her appearance, I suppose; but I am so angry
with her for disappointing us all, and you in particular, by changing
her mind about Sigismunda!--Such a capital Tancred as you would have
made! and now you are no character at all! But then, you are only on a
par with certain ladies. Comfort yourself with the great Pope’s (I fear
too true) reflection, that

     ‘Most women have no characters at all.’”

Miss Bateman’s eye glanced insolently, as she spoke, upon Lady
Glistonbury’s trio, who passed by at this instant, all without fancy
dresses. Vivian shocked by this ill-breeding towards the mistress of the
house, offered his arm immediately to Lady Glistonbury, and conducted
her with Lady Sarah and Miss Strictland to their proper places, where,
having seated themselves, each in the same attitude precisely, they
looked more like martyrs prepared for endurance, than like persons in a
ball-room. Vivian stayed to speak a few words to Lady Glistonbury, and
was just going away, when her ladyship, addressing him with more than
her usual formality, said, “Mr. Vivian, I see, has not adopted the
fashion of the day; and as he is the only gentleman present, whose fancy
dress does not proclaim him engaged to some partner equally _fanciful_,
I cannot but wish that my daughter, Lady Sarah, should, if she dance at
all to-night, dance with a gentleman in his own proper character.”

Vivian, thus called upon, felt compelled to ask the honour of Lady
Sarah’s hand; but he flattered himself, that after the first dance he
should have done his duty, and that he should be at liberty by the time
Julia should make her appearance. But, to his great disappointment,
Mr. Russell, who came in just as he had finished the first two dances,
informed him that Lady Julia was determined not to appear at the ball,
but to stay with her brother, who wished for her company. So poor Vivian
found himself doomed to be Lady Sarah’s partner for the remainder of the
night. It happened that, as he was handing her ladyship to supper, in
passing through an antechamber where some of the neighbours of inferior
rank had been permitted to assemble to see _the show_, he heard one
farmer’s wife say to another, “Who _beas_ that there, that’s handing of
Lady Sarah?”--They were detained a little by the crowd, so that he had
time to hear the whole answer.--“Don’t you know?” was the answer. “That
there gentleman is Mr. Vivian of the new castle, that is to be married
to her directly, and that’s what he’s come here for; for they’ve been
engaged to one another ever since the time o’ the election.”

This speech disturbed our hero’s mind considerably; for it awakened a
train of reflections which he had wilfully left dormant. Will it, can it
be believed, that after all his friend Russell’s exhortations, after
his own wise resolutions, he had never yet made any of those explanatory
speeches he had intended?

“Positively,” said he to himself, “this report shall not prevail
four-and-twenty hours longer. I will propose for Lady Julia
Lidhurst before I sleep. Russell, to be sure, advises me not to be
precipitate--to take more time to study her disposition; but I am
acquainted with her sufficiently;” (he should have said, I am in
love with her sufficiently;) “and really now, I am bound in honour
immediately to declare myself--it is the best possible way of putting a
stop to a report which will be ultimately injurious to Lady Sarah.”

Thus Vivian made his past irresolution an excuse for his present
precipitation, flattering himself, as men often do when they are
yielding to the impulse of their passions, that they are submitting
to the dictates of reason. At six o’clock in the morning the company
dispersed. Lord Glistonbury and Vivian were the last in the ball-room.
His lordship began some raillery upon our hero’s having declined
appearing as Tancred, and upon his having devoted himself all night to
Lady Sarah. Vivian seized the moment to explain his real feelings,
and he made his proposal for Lady Julia. It was received with warm
approbation by the father, who seemed to rejoice the more in this
proposal, because he knew that it would disappoint and mortify Lady
Glistonbury. The interests of his hatred seemed, indeed, to occupy his
lordship more than the interests of Vivian’s love; but politeness threw
a decent veil over these feelings; and, after saying all that could be
expected of the satisfaction it must be to a father to see his daughter
united to a man of Mr. Vivian’s family, fortune, talents, and
great respectability; and after having given, incidentally and
parenthetically, his opinions, not only concerning matrimony, but
concerning all other affairs of human life, he wished his future
son-in-law a very good night, and left him to repose. But no rest could
Vivian take--he waited with impatience, that made every hour appear at
least two, for the time when he was again to meet Lady Julia. He saw her
at breakfast; but he perceived by her countenance that she as yet knew
nothing of his proposal. After breakfast Lord Glistonbury said, “Come
with me, my little Julia! it is a long time since I’ve had a walk and a
talk with you.” His lordship paced up and down the terrace, conversing
earnestly with her for some time: he then went on to some labourers,
who were cutting down a tree at the farther end of the avenue. Vivian
hastened out to meet Lady Julia, who, after standing deep in thought for
some moments, seemed returning towards the castle.




CHAPTER IX.

'Perhaps, Mr. Vivian,' said Lady Julia, 'I ought, at this instant,
to pretend to be ignorant of the honour you have done me; and perhaps
I ought to wait in form, and affect pretty surprise, at hearing from
you, what I have just learned from my father. But I am little skilled
in coquetry; I disdain all female affection, though I trust I am not
deficient in maidenly modesty, when it is not incompatible with what I deem a higher
virtue--sincerity. Now and ever, frankness is, and shall be, my
only policy. The confidence I am about to repose in you, sir, is the
strongest proof of my esteem, and of the gratitude I feel for your
attachment.--My heart is no longer in my power to bestow. It is--young
as I am, I dare to pronounce the words--irrevocably fixed upon one who
will do honour to my choice. Your proposal was made to my father--Why
was it not made to me?--Men--all men but one--treat women as puppets,
and then wonder that they are not rational creatures!--Forgive me this
too just reproach. But, as I was going to say, your proposal has
thrown me into great difficulties--the greater because my father warmly
approves of it. I have a strong affection for him; and, perhaps, a
year or two ago, I should, in the ignorance in which I was dogmatically
brought up, have thought it my duty to submit implicitly to parental
authority, and to receive a husband from the hands of a father, without
consulting either my own heart or my own judgment. But, since my mind
has been more enlightened, and has opened to higher views of the dignity
of my sex, and higher hopes of happiness, my ideas of duty have altered;
and, I trust, I have sufficient courage to support my own idea of the
rights of my sex, and my firm conviction of what is just and becoming.”

Vivian was again going to say something; but, whether against or in
favour of the rights of the sex, he had not clearly decided; when her
ladyship saved him the trouble, by proceeding with the train of her
ideas.

“My sincerity towards my father will, perhaps, cost me dear; but I
cannot repent of it. As soon as I knew the state of my own heart--which
was not till very lately--which was not, indeed, till you gave me reason
to think you seriously liked me--I openly told my father all I knew of
my own heart. Would you believe it?--I am sure I should not, unless
I had seen and felt it--my father, who, you know, professes the most
liberal opinions possible; my father, who, in conversation is ‘All for
love, and the world well lost;’ my father, who let Miss Bateman put the
Heloise into my hands, was astonished, shocked, indignant, at his own
daughter’s confession, I should say, assertion of her preference of a
man of high merit, who wants only the advantages, if they be advantages,
of rank and fortune. My father was more astonished, more shocked, more
indignant, than I can describe to you -- quite outrageous, at the first hint
of my thinking of any thing, in short, but a _suitable establishment_, an
establishment that should strengthen his political connexions, and do honour,
in the eyes of the fashionable world, to his favourite daughter. -- Oh!
the narrow-minded selfishness, the coldness of heart, the apathy! -- But of
my father let me not say a disrespectful, an unkind word -- he loves me --
I wish I could esteem him as I did -- I thought him superior to vulgar
prejudices. -- Would not you have thought so from his conversation?
-- He it was who first enlarged my mind. Would to Heaven! that he had never
taken me from my mother's strict vigilance, from 'the bliss of ignorance,'
in which I was brought up, unless I am to be allowed to use my understanding,
to follow the dictates of my heart, and to enjoy the liberty of a freeborn,
rational creature! --'

Lady Julia, as she turned her eyes up to Heaven, looked at least a
beautiful creature.

“Mr. Vivian,” continued she, “may I hope that now, when you must be
convinced of the inefficacy of any attempt either to win or to control
my affections, you will have the generosity to spare me all unnecessary
contest with my father? If I am driven to oppose my father's commands, and
to reject the offer of an establishment, of a connexion, which is every thing
he desires for me, it will, without being of any advantage to you,
increase my difficulties. It must render him more averse from the only
union that can make his daughter happy; and it may ruin the fortunes
of--the first, in my opinion, of human beings. I leave it to you, who have,'
continued lady Julia, smiling, 'so much more practice in these things than I
have, to devise some means of withdrawing your suit. I will request another
favour from you--and let my willingness to be obliged by you convince
you that I appreciate your character--I request that you will not only
keep secret all that I have said to you; but that, if accident, or
your own penetration, should hereafter discover to you the object of my
affection, you will refrain from making any use of that discovery to my
disadvantage. You see how entirely I have thrown myself on your honour
and generosity.”

Vivian assured her that the appeal was powerful with him; and that, by
mastering his own passions, and sacrificing his feelings to hers, he
would endeavour to show his strong desire to secure, at all events, her
happiness.

'I expected generosity from you, Mr. Vivian,' said lady Julia; 'and
I am glad to find that I was not mistaken. You are not like some
pretended lovers, who begin to hate, and attempt to injure, the
moment they are disappointed, or the moment their vanity is wounded.
This is one example more added to my own experience, which convinces
me, that true love is pure from vanity -- I was a very vain, childish
creature; till love cured me of vanity and of a thousand faults and
foibles. How it expands, exalts, ennobles the mind! Happy or miserable,
in my future life, I have at least felt this "unreproved pleasure".'

'Charming woman!' exclaimed Vivian, 'may you never, as I do, feel the
pain of disappointed affection!'

“You are truly generous, Mr. Vivian, to listen to me with indulgence, to
wish for my happiness, whilst I have been wounding your feelings. But,
without any impeachment of your sincerity, or yet of your sensibility,
let me say, that yours will be only a transient disappointment. Your
acquaintance with me is but of yesterday, and the slight impression made
on your mind will soon be effaced; but upon my mind there has been time
to grave a deep, a first charactery of love, that never, whilst memory
holds her seat, can be erased.--I believe,” said Julia, checking
herself, whilst a sudden blush overspread her countenance--“I am
afraid that I have said too much, too much for a woman. The fault of
my character, I know, I have been told, is the want of what is called
RESERVE.”

Blushing still more deeply as she pronounced these last words, the
colour darting up to her temples, spreading over her neck, and making
its way to the very tips of her fingers, “Now I have done worse,” cried
she, covering her face with her hands. But the next moment, resuming,
or trying to resume her self-possession, she said, “It is time that I
should retire, now that I have revealed my whole heart to you. It has,
perhaps, been imprudently opened; but for that, your generosity, sir,
is to blame. Had you shown more selfishness, I should assuredly have
exerted more prudence, and have treated you with less confidence.”

Lady Julia quitted him, and Vivian remained in a species of amaze, from
which he could not immediately recover. Her frankness, her magnanimity,
her enthusiastic sensibility, her eloquent beauty, had altogether
exalted, to the highest ecstasy, his love and admiration. Then he walked
about, beating his breast in despair at the thought of her affections
being irrecoverably engaged,--next quarrelled with the boldness of the
confession, the _assertion_ of her love--then decided, that, with all
her shining qualities and noble dispositions, she was not exactly the
woman a man should desire for a wife: there was something too rash, too
romantic about her; there was in her character, as she herself had
said, and as Russell had remarked, too little _reserve_. Something like
jealousy and distrust of his friend arose in Vivian’s mind: “What!” said
he to himself, “and is Russell my rival? and has he been all this time
in secret my rival? Is it possible that Russell has been practising upon
the affections of this innocent young creature--confided to him too?
All this time, whilst he has been cautioning me against her charms,
beseeching me not to propose for her precipitately, is it possible that
he wanted only to get, to keep the start of me?--No--impossible! utterly
impossible! If all the circumstances, all the evidence upon earth
conspired, I would not believe it.”

Resolved not to do injustice, even in his inmost soul, to his friend,
our hero repelled all suspicion of Russell, by reflecting on his long
and tried integrity, and on the warmth and fidelity of his friendship.
In this temper he was crossing the castle-yard to go to Russell’s
apartment, when he was met and stopped by one of the domesticated
friends of the family, Mr. Mainwaring, the young lawyer: he was in the
confidence of Lord Glistonbury, and, proud to show it, he let Mr.
Vivian know that he was apprised of the proposal that had been made,
and congratulated him, and all the parties concerned, on the prospect of
such an agreeable connexion. Vivian was quite unprepared to speak to any
one, much less to a lawyer, upon this subject; he had not even thought
of the means of obeying Lady Julia, by withdrawing his suit; therefore,
with a mixture of vexation and embarrassment in his manner, he answered
in commonplace phrases, meant to convey no precise meaning, and
endeavoured to disengage himself from his companion; but the lawyer, who
had fastened upon him, linking his arm in Vivian’s, continued to walk
him up and down under the great gateway, saying that he had a word or
two of importance for his private ear. This man had taken much pains
to insinuate himself into Vivian’s favour, by the most obsequious and
officious attentions: though his flattery had at first been disgusting,
yet, by persevering in his show of civility, he had at length inclined
Vivian to think that he was too harsh in his first judgment, and to
believe that, “after all, Mainwaring was a good friendly fellow, though
his manner was against him.”

Mr. Mainwaring, with many professions of regard for Vivian, and with
sundry premisings that he hazarded himself by the communication, took
the liberty of hinting, that he guessed, from Mr. Vivian’s manner this
morning, that obstacles had arisen on the part of a young lady who
should be nameless; and he should make bold to add that, in his private
opinion, the said obstacles would never be removed whilst _a certain
person_ remained in the castle, and whilst the young lady alluded to
was allowed to spend so much of her time studying with her brother when
well, or nursing him when sick. Mr. Mainwaring declared that he was
perfectly astonished at Lord Glistonbury’s blindness or imprudence
in keeping this person in the house, after the hints his lordship had
received, and after all the proofs that must or may have fallen within
his cognizance, of the arts of seduction that had been employed. Here
Vivian interrupted Mr. Mainwaring, to beg that he would not keep him
longer in suspense by _inuendoes_, but that he would name distinctly
the object of his suspicions. This, however, Mr. Mainwaring begged to
be excused from doing: he would only shake his head and smile, and leave
people to their own sagacity and penetration. Vivian warmly answered,
that, if Mr. Mainwaring meant Mr. Russell, he was well assured that Mr.
Mainwaring was utterly mistaken in attributing to him any but the most
honourable conduct.

Mr. Mainwaring smiled, and shook his head--smiled again, and sighed, and
hoped Mr. Vivian was right, and observed that time would show; and that,
at all events, he trusted Mr. Vivian would keep profoundly secret the
hint which his friendship had, indiscreetly perhaps, hazarded.

Scarcely had Mr. Mainwaring retired, when Captain Pickering met and
seized upon Vivian, led to the same subject, and gave similar hints,
that Russell was the happy rival who had secretly made himself master of
Lady Julia’s heart. Vivian, though much astonished, finding that
these gentlemen agreed in their discoveries or their suspicions, still
defended his friend Russell, and strongly protested that he would be
responsible for his honour with his life, if it were necessary. The
captain shrugged his shoulders, said it was none of his business, that,
as Mr. Vivian _took it up so warmly,_ he should let it drop; for it was
by no means his intention to get into a quarrel with Mr. Vivian, for
whom he had a particular regard. This said, with all the frankness of a
soldier, Captain Pickering withdrew, adding, as the clergyman passed at
this instant, “There’s a man who could tell you more than any of us, if
he would, but _snug’s_ the word with Wicksted.”

Vivian, in great anxiety and much curiosity, appealed to Mr. Wicksted:
he protested that he knew nothing, suspected nothing, at least could
venture to say nothing; for these were very delicate family matters, and
every gentleman should, on these occasions, make it a principle to see
with his own eyes. Gradually, however, Mr. Wicksted let out his opinion,
and implied infinitely more than Captain Pickering or Mr. Mainwaring
had asserted. Vivian still maintained, in the warmest terms, that it was
impossible his friend Russell should be to blame. Mr. Wicksted simply
pronounced the word _friend_ with a peculiar emphasis, and, with an
incredulous smile, left him to his reflections. Those reflections were
painful; for, though he defended Russell from the attacks of others,
yet he had not sufficient firmness of mind completely to resist the
suggestions of suspicion and jealousy, particularly when they had been
corroborated by so many concurring testimonies. He had no longer the
courage to go immediately to Russell, to tell him of his proposal for
Lady Julia, or to speak to him of any of his secret feelings; but,
turning away from the staircase that led to his friend’s apartment, he
determined to observe Russell with his own eyes, before he should decide
upon the truth or falsehood of the accusations which had been brought
against him. Alas! Vivian was no longer in a condition to observe with
his own eyes; his imagination was so perturbed, that he could neither
see nor hear any thing as it really was. When he next saw Russell and
Lady Julia together, he wondered at his blindness in not having sooner
perceived their mutual attachment: notwithstanding that Lady Julia had
now the strongest motives to suppress every indication of her passion,
symptoms of it broke out continually, the more violent, perhaps, from
her endeavours to conceal them. He knew that she was passionately in
love with Russell; and that Russell should not have perceived what every
other man, even every indifferent spectator, had discovered, appeared
incredible. Russell’s calm manner and entire self-possession sometimes
provoked Vivian, and sometimes quelled his suspicions; sometimes he
looked upon this calmness as the extreme of art, sometimes as a proof of
innocence, which could not be counterfeit. At one moment he was so much
struck with Russell’s friendly countenance, that, quite ashamed of
his suspicions, he was upon the point of speaking openly to him; but,
unfortunately, these intentions were frustrated by some slight obstacle.
At length Miss Strictland, who had lately been very courteous to Mr.
Vivian, took an opportunity of drawing him into one of the recessed
windows; where, with infinite difficulty in bringing herself to speak
on such a subject, after inconceivable bridlings of the head, and
contortions of every muscle of her neck, she insinuated to him her
fears, that my Lord Glistonbury’s confidence had been very ill placed in
Lord Lidhurst’s tutor: she was aware that Mr. Russell had the honour of
Mr. Vivian’s friendship, but nothing could prevent her from speaking,
where she felt it to be so much her duty; and that, as from the
unfortunate circumstances in the family she had no longer any influence
over Lady Julia Lidhurst, nor any chance of being listened to on such a
subject with patience by Lord Glistonbury, she thought the best course
she could take was to apply to Mr. Russell’s friend, who might possibly,
by his interference, prevent the utter disgrace and ruin of one branch
of a noble family.

Miss Strictland, in all she said, hinted not at Vivian’s attachment to
Lady Julia, and gave him no reason to believe that she was apprised of
his having proposed for her ladyship: she spoke with much moderation and
candour; attributed all Lady Julia’s errors to the imprudence of her
new governess, Miss Bateman. Miss Strictland now showed a desire not to
make, but to prevent mischief; even the circumlocutions and stiffness
of her habitual prudery did not, on this occasion, seem unseasonable;
therefore what she suggested made a great impression on Vivian. He
still, however, defended Russell, and assured Miss Strictland that, from
the long experience he had himself had of his friend’s honour, he was
convinced that no temptation could shake his integrity. Miss Strictland
had formed her opinion on this point, she said, and it would be in vain
to argue against it. Every new assertion; the belief of each new person
who spoke to him on the subject; the combination, the coincidence of all
their opinions, wrought his mind to such a height of jealousy, that he
was now absolutely incapable of using his reason. He went in search of
Russell, but in no fit mood to speak to him as he ought. He looked for
him in his own, in Lord Lidhurst’s apartment, in every sitting-room in
the castle; but Mr. Russell was not to be found: at last Lady Sarah’s
maid, who heard him inquiring for Mr. Russell from the servants, told
him, “she fancied that if he took the trouble to go to the west walk,
he might find Mr. Russell, as that was a favourite walk of his.” Vivian
hurried thither, with a secret expectation of finding Lady Julia with
him--there they both were in earnest conversation: as he approached, the
trees concealed him from view; and Vivian heard his own name repeated.
“Stop!” cried he, advancing: “let me not overhear your secrets--I am not
a traitor to my friends!”

As he spoke, his eyes fixed with an expression of concentrated rage upon
Russell. Terrified by Vivian’s sudden appearance and strange address,
and still more by the fierce look he cast on Russell, Lady Julia started
and uttered a faint scream. With astonishment, but without losing his
self-command, Russell advanced towards Vivian, saying, “You are out of
your senses, my dear friend!--I will not listen to you in your present
humour. Take a turn or two with me to cool yourself. The anger of a
friend should always be allowed three minutes’ grace, at least,” added
Russell, smiling, and endeavouring to draw Vivian away: but Vivian stood
immoveable; Russell’s calmness, instead of bringing him to his senses,
only increased his anger; to his distempered imagination this coolness
seemed perfidious dissimulation.

“You cannot deceive me longer, Mr. Russell, by all your art!” cried he.
“Though I am the last to open my eyes, I have opened them. Why did you
pretend to be my counsellor and friend, when you were my rival?--when
you knew that you were my successful rival?----Yes, start and affect
astonishment! Yes--look, if you can, with _innocent_ surprise upon that
lady!--Say that you have not betrayed her father’s confidence!--say,
that you have not practised upon her unguarded heart!--say, that you do
not know that she loves you to distraction!”

“Oh! Mr. Vivian, what have you done?” cried Lady Julia: she could say
no more, but fell senseless on the ground. Vivian’s anger was at once
sobered by this sight.

“What have I done!” repeated he, as they raised her from the ground.
“Wretch! dishonourable villain that I am! I have betrayed her
secret--But I thought every body knew it!----Is it possible that _you_
did not know it, Russell?”

Russell made no reply, but ran to the river which was near them for
some water--Vivian was incapable of affording any assistance, or even of
forming a distinct idea. As soon as Lady Julia returned to her senses,
Russell withdrew; Vivian threw himself on his knees before her, and
said something about the violence of his passion--his sorrow--and
her forgiveness. “Mr. Vivian,” said Lady Julia, turning to him with a
mixture of despair and dignity in her manner, “do not kneel to me;
do not make use of any commonplace phrases--I cannot, at this moment,
forgive you--you have done me an irreparable injury. I confided a secret
to you--a secret known to no human being but my father and yourself--you
have revealed it, and to whom?--Sooner would I have had it proclaimed to
the whole world than to ----; for what is the opinion of the whole world
to me, compared to his? -- Sunk, lost perhaps, in his esteeem! -- Sir, 
you have done me, indeed, an irremediable injury!--I trusted to your
honour--your discretion--and you have betrayed, sacrificed me.”

“Vile suspicions!” cried Vivian, striking his forehead: “how could I
listen to them for a moment!”

“Suspicions of Mr. Russell!” cried Julia, with a look of high
indignation--“Suspicions of your noble-minded friend!--What wickedness,
or what weakness!”

“Weakness!--miserable weakness!--the sudden effect of jealousy; and
could you know, Lady Julia, by what means, by what arts, my mind was
worked up to this insanity!”

“I cannot listen to this now, Mr. Vivian,” interrupted Lady Julia: “my
thoughts cannot fix upon such things--I cannot go back to the past--what
is done cannot be undone--what has been said cannot be unsaid.--You
cannot recall your words--they were heard--they were understood. I beg
you to leave me, sir, that I may have leisure to _think_--if possible,
to consider what yet remains for me to do. I have no friend--none, none
willing or capable of advising me! I begged of you to leave me, sir.”

Vivian could not, at this moment, decide whether he ought or ought not
to tell Lady Julia that her secret was known, or at least suspected, by
many individuals of the family.

“There’s a servant on the terrace who seems to be looking for us,” said
Vivian; “I had something of consequence to say--but this man--”

“My lady, Miss Bateman desired me to let you know, my lady, that
there is the Lady Playdels, and the colonel, and Sir James, in the
drawing-room, just come;--and she begs, my lady, you will be pleased to
come to them; for Miss Bateman’s waiting for you, my lady, to repeat the
verses, she bid me say, my lady.”

“Go to them, Mr. Vivian; I cannot go.”

“My lady,” persisted the footman, “my lord himself begged you to come;
and he and all the gentlemen have been looking for you every where.”

“Return to my father, then, and say that I am coming immediately.”

“Forced into company!” thought Lady Julia, as she walked slowly towards
the house; “compelled to appear calm and gay, when my heart is--what
a life of dissimulation! How unworthy of me, formed, as I was once
pronounced to be, for every thing that is good and great!--But I am no
longer mistress of myself--no soul left but for one object. Why did
I not better guard my heart?--No!--rather, why can I not follow its
dictates, and at once avow and justify its choice?”

Vivian interrupted Lady Julia’s reverie by pointing out to her, as they
passed along the terrace, a group of heads, in one of the back windows
of the castle, that seemed to be watching them very earnestly. Miss
Strictland’s face was foremost; half her body was out of the window; and
as she drew back, they heard her say--“It is not he!--It is not he!”--As
they passed another front of the castle, another party seemed to be
upon the watch at a staircase window;--the lawyer, the captain, the
clergyman’s heads appeared for a moment, and vanished.

“They seem all to be upon the watch for us,” said Vivian.

“Meanness!” cried Lady Julia. “To watch or to be watched, I know not
which is most degrading; but I cannot think they are watching us.”

“My dear Lady Julia!--yet let me call you dear this once--my hopes are
gone!--even for your forgiveness I have no right to hope--but let me do
you one piece of service--let me put your open temper on its guard. You
flatter yourself that the secret you confided to me is not known to
any body living but to your father--I have reason to believe that it
is suspected, if not positively known, by several other persons in this
castle.”

“Impossible!”

“I am certain, too certain, of what I say.”

Lady Julia made a sudden stop; and, after a pause, exclaimed--

“Then farewell hope! and, with hope, farewell fear!”

“My lady, my lord sent me again, for my lord’s very impatient for you,
my lady,” said the same footman, returning. Lord Glistonbury met them in
the hall.--“Why, Julia! where have you been all this time?” he began, in
an imperious tone; but seeing Mr. Vivian, his brow grew smooth and his
voice good-humoured instantly.--“Ha!--So! so!--Hey! well!--All right!
all right!--Good girl! good girl!--Time for every thing--Hey! Mr.
Vivian?--‘Que la solitude est charmante!’ as Voltaire says--Beg
pardon for sending for you; but interruption, you know, prevents
_têtes-à-têtes_ on the stage from growing tiresome; and the stage, they
say, holds the mirror up to nature. But there’s no nature now left to
hold the mirror up to, except in a few odd instances, as in my Julia
here!--Where so fast, my blushing darling?”

“I thought you wished, sir, that I should go to Lady Playdel and Sir
James.”

“Ay, ay, I sent for you to repeat those charming verses for them that I
could not clearly remember.--Go up! go up!--We’ll follow you!--We have a
word or two to say about something--that’s nothing to you.”

Lord Glistonbury kept Vivian for a full hour in a state of considerable
embarrassment, talking to him of Lady Julia, implying that she was
favourably disposed towards him, but that she had a little pride, that
might make her affect the contrary at first. Then came a disquisition
on pride, with quotations and commonplaces;--then an eulogium, by his
lordship, on his lordship’s own knowledge of the human heart, and more
especially of that “moving toyshop,” the female heart; then anecdotes
illustrative, comprising the gallantries of thirty years in various
ranks of life, with suitable bon-mots and embellishments;--then a little
French sentiment, by way of moral, with some philosophical axioms,
to show that, though he had led such a gay life, he had been a deep
thinker, and that, though nobody could have thought that he had had time
for reading, his genius had supplied him, he could not himself really
tell how, with what other people with the study of years could not
master:--all which Vivian was compelled to hear, whilst he was the whole
time impatient to get away, that he might search for Mr. Russell, with
whom he was anxious to have an explanation. But, at last, when Lord
Glistonbury set him free, he was not nearer to his object. Mr. Russell,
he found upon inquiry, had not returned to the castle, nor did he return
to dinner; he sent word that he was engaged to dine with a party of
gentlemen at a literary club, in a country town nine miles distant.
Vivian spent the greatest part of the evening in Lord Lidhurst’s
apartment, expecting Russell’s return; but it grew so late, that Lord
Lidhurst, who was still indisposed, went to bed; and when Vivian quitted
his lordship, he met Russell’s servant in the gallery, who said his
master had been come in an hour ago: “but, sir,” added the man, “my
master won’t let you see him, I am sure; for he would not let me in, and
he said, that, if you asked for him, I was to answer, that he could not
see you to-night.”--Vivian knocked in vain at Russell’s door; he could
not gain admission; so he went reluctantly to bed, determined to rise
very early, that he might see his friend as soon as possible, obtain his
forgiveness for the past, and ask his advice for the future.




CHAPTER X.


Suspense, curiosity, love, jealousy, remorse, any one of which is enough
to keep a person awake all night, by turns agitated poor Vivian so
violently, that for several hours he could not close his eyes; but at
last, when quite exhausted, he fell into a profound sleep. The first
image that came before his mind, when he awoke in the morning, was that
of Lady Julia; his next recollection was of Russell.

“Is Mr. Russell up yet?” said Vivian to his servant, who was bringing in
his boots.

“Up, sir! Oh, yes, hours ago!--He was _off_ at daybreak!”

“Off!” cried Vivian, starting up in his bed; “off!--Where is he gone?”

“I can’t say, sir. Yes, indeed, sir, I heard Mr. Russell’s man say, that
his master was going post to the north, to some old uncle that was taken
ill, which he heard about at dinner from some of those gentlemen where
he dined yesterday; but I can’t say positively. But here’s a letter he
left for you with me.”

“A letter!--Give it me!--Why didn’t you give it me sooner?”

“Why really, sir, you lay so sound, I didn’t care to waken you; and I
was up so late myself, too, last night.”

“Leave me now; I’ll ring when I want you.”


“TO C. VIVIAN, ESQ.

“I would not see you, after what passed yesterday, because I feared that
I should not speak to you with temper. Lest you should misinterpret any
thing I have formerly said, I must now solemnly assure you, that I never
had the slightest suspicion of the secret you revealed to me till the
moment when it was betrayed by your indiscretion. Still I can
scarcely credit what appears to me so improbable; but, even under this
uncertainty, I think it my duty to leave this family. Had the slightest
idea of what you suggested ever crossed my imagination, I should then
have acted as I do now. I say this, not to justify myself, but to
convince you, that what I formerly hinted about reserve of manners and
prudence was merely a _general reflection_.

“For my own part, I seem to act HEROICALLY; but I must disclaim that
applause to which I am not entitled. All powerful as the temptation must
appear to you, dangerous as it must have been, in other circumstances,
to me, I cannot claim any merit for resisting its influence. My safety I
owe neither to my own prudence or fortitude. I will be still more explicit.
Lest I should leave any doubts, respecting my feelings and sentiments, which
might be injurious to the happiness of one, for whose happiness I am most
earnestly and gratefully anxious. I must now, Vivian, impart
to you a secret which you are at liberty to confide where and when you
think necessary--my heart is, and has long been, engaged. Whilst you
were attached to Miss Sidney, I endeavoured to subdue my love for
her; and every symptom of it was, I hope and believe, suppressed. This
declaration cannot now give you any pain; except so far as it may,
perhaps, excite in your mind some remorse for having unwarrantably,
unworthily, and weakly, suffered yourself to feel suspicions of a true
friend. Well as I know the infirmity of your character, and willing as I
have always been to make allowance for a fault which I thought time and
experience would correct, I was not prepared for this last stroke; I
never thought your weakness of mind would have shown itself in suspicion
of your best, your long-tried friend.--But I am at last convinced that
your mind is not strong enough for confidence and friendship. I pity,
but I see that I can no longer serve; and I feel that I can no longer
esteem you. Farewell! Vivian. May you find a friend, who will supply to
you the place of H. RUSSELL.”

Vivian knew Russell’s character too well to flatter himself that the
latter part of this letter was written in anger that would quickly
subside; from the tone of the letter he felt that Russell was deeply
offended. In the whole course of his life he had depended on Russell’s
friendship as a solid blessing, of which he could never be deprived by
any change of circumstances--by any possible chance in human affairs;
and now to have lost such a friend by his own folly, by his own
weakness, was a misfortune of which he could hardly believe the reality.
At the same moment, too, he learned how nobly Russell had behaved
towards him, in the most trying situation in which the human heart can
be placed. Russell’s love for Selina Sidney, Vivian had never till
this instant suspected. “What force, what command of mind!--What
magnanimity!--What a generous friend he has ever been to me!--and I--”

Poor Vivian, always sinning and always penitent, was so much absorbed by
sorrow for the loss of Russell’s friendship, that he could not for some
time think even of the interests of his love, or consider the advantage
which he might derive from the absence of his rival, and from that
rival’s explicit declaration, that his affections were irrevocably
engaged. By degrees these ideas rose clearly to Vivian’s view; his hopes
revived. Lady Julia would see the absolute impossibility of Russell’s
returning, or of his accepting her affection; her good sense, her pride,
would in time subdue this hopeless passion; and Vivian was generous
enough, or sufficiently in love, to feel that the value of her heart
would not be diminished, but rather increased in his opinion, by the
sensibility she had shown to the talents and virtues of his friend. _His
friend_, Vivian ventured now to call him; for with the hopes of love,
the hopes of friendship rose.

“All may yet be well!” said he to himself. “Russell will forgive me
when he hears how I was worked upon by those parasites and prudish
busybodies, who infused their vile suspicions into my mind. Weak as
it is, I never will allow that it is incapable of confidence or of
friendship!--No! Russell will retract that harsh sentence. When he is
happy, as I am sure I ardently hope he will be, in Selina’s love, he
will restore me to his favour. Without his friendship, I could not be
satisfied with myself, or happy in the full accomplishment of all my
other fondest hopes.”

By the time that hope had thus revived and renovated our hero’s soul;
by the time that his views of things had totally changed, and that the
colour of his future destiny had turned from black to white--from all
gloom to all sunshine; the minute-hand of the clock had moved with
unfeeling regularity, or, in plain unmeasured prose, it was now eleven
o’clock, and three times Vivian had been warned that breakfast was
ready. When he entered the room, the first thing he heard, as usual, was
Miss Bateman’s voice, who was declaiming upon some sentimental point, in
all “the high sublime of deep absurd.” Vivian, little interested in
this display, and joining neither in the open flattery nor in the secret
ridicule with which the gentlemen wits and amateurs listened to the
Rosamunda, looked round for Lady Julia. “She breakfasts in her own
room this morning,” whispered Lord Glistonbury, before Vivian had even
pronounced her ladyship’s name.

“So!” said Mr. Pickering, “we have lost Mr. Russell this morning!”

“Yes,” said Lord Glistonbury, “he was forced to hurry away to the north,
I find, to an old sick uncle.”

“Lord Lidhurst, I’m afraid, will break his heart for want of him,”
 cried the lawyer, in a tone that might either pass for earnest or irony,
according to the fancy of the interpreter.

“Lord Lidhurst, did you say?”--cried the captain: “are you sure you
meant Lord Lidhurst? I don’t apprehend that a young nobleman ever broke
his heart after his tutor. But I was going to remark----”

What farther the captain was going to remark can never be known to the
world; for Lord Glistonbury so startled him by the loud and rather angry
tone in which he called for the cream, which _stood_ with the captain,
that all his few ideas were put to flight. Mr. Pickering, who noticed
Lord Glistonbury’s displeasure, now resumed the conversation about Mr.
Russell in a new tone; and the lawyer and he joined in a eulogy
upon that gentleman. Lord Glistonbury said not a word, but looked
embarrassed. Miss Strictland cleared her throat several times, and
looked infinitely more rigid and mysterious than usual. Lady Glistonbury
and Lady Sarah, ditto--ditto. Almost every body, except such visitors
as were strangers at the castle, perceived that there was something
extraordinary going on in the family; and the gloom and constraint
spread so, that, towards the close of breakfast, nothing was uttered, by
prudent people, but awkward sentences about the weather--the wind--and
the likelihood of there being a mail from the continent. Still through
all this, regardless and unknowing of it all, the Rosamunda talked on,
happily abstracted, egotistically secured from the pains of sympathy
or of curiosity by the all-sufficient power of vanity. Even her patron,
Lord Glistonbury, was at last provoked and disgusted. He was heard,
under his breath, to pronounce a contemptuous _Pshaw!_ and, as he rose
from the breakfast table he whispered to Vivian, “There’s a woman, now,
who thinks of nothing living but herself!--All talkèe talkèe!--I begin
to be weary of her.----Gentlemen,” continued his lordship, “I’ve letters
to write this morning.----You’ll ride--you’ll walk--you’re for the
billiard-room, I suppose.----Mr. Vivian, I shall find you in my study, I
hope, an hour hence; but first I have a little business to settle.” With
evident embarrassment Lord Glistonbury retired. Lady Glistonbury,
Lady Sarah, and Miss Strictland, each sighed; then, with looks of
intelligence, rose and retired. The company separated soon afterwards;
and went to ride, to walk, or to the billiard-room, and Vivian to the
study, to wait there for Lord Glistonbury, and to meditate upon what
might be the nature of his lordship’s business. As Vivian crossed the
gallery, the door of Lady Glistonbury’s dressing-room opened, and was
shut again instantaneously by Miss Strictland; but not before he saw
Lady Julia kneeling at her father’s feet, whilst Lady Glistonbury and
Lady Sarah were standing like statues, on each side of his lordship.
Vivian waited a full hour afterwards in tedious suspense in the study.
At last he heard doors open and footsteps, and he judged that the family
council had broken up; he laid down a book, of which he had read the
same page over six times, without any one of the words it contained
having conveyed a single idea to his mind. Lord Glistonbury came in,
with papers and parchments in his hands.

“Mr. Vivian, I am afraid you have been waiting for me--have a thousand
pardons to ask--I really could not come any sooner--I wished to speak
to you--Won’t you sit down?--We had better sit down quietly--there’s no
sort of hurry.”

His lordship, however, seemed to be in great agitation-of spirits;
and Vivian was convinced that his mind must be interested in an
extraordinary manner, because he did not, as was his usual practice,
digress to fifty impertinent episodes before he came to the point. He
only blew his nose sundry times; and then at once said, “I wish to speak
to you, Mr. Vivian, about the proposal you did me the honour to make
for my daughter Julia. Difficulties have occurred on our side--very
extraordinary difficulties--Julia, I understand, has hinted to you,
sir, the nature of those difficulties.--Oh, Mr. Vivian,” said Lord
Glistonbury, suddenly quitting the constrained voice in which he spoke,
and giving way to his natural feelings, “you are a man of honour and
feeling, and a father may trust you!----Here’s my girl--a charming
girl she is; but knowing nothing of the world--self-willed, romantic,
open-hearted, imprudent beyond conception; do not listen to any of the
foolish things she says to you. You are a man of sense, you love her,
and you are every way suited to her; it is the first wish of my heart--I
tell you frankly--to see her your wife: then do not let her childish
folly persuade you that her affections are engaged--don’t listen to any
such stuff. We all know what the first loves of a girl of sixteen must
be--But it’s our fault--my fault, my fault, since they will have it so.
I care not whose fault it is; but we have had very improper people about
her--very!--very!--But all may be well yet, if you, sir, will be steady,
and save her--save her from herself. I would farther suggest----”

Lord Glistonbury was going on, probably, to have weakened by
amplification the effect of what he had said, when Lady Julia entered
the room; and, advancing with dignified determination of manner, said,
“I have your commands, father, that I should see Mr. Vivian again:--I
obey.”

“That is right--that is my darling Julia; I always knew she would
justify my high opinion of her.” Lord Glistonbury attempted to draw her
towards him fondly; but, with an unaltered manner, that seemed as if
she suppressed strong emotion, she answered, “I do not deserve your
caresses, father; do not oppress me with praise that I cannot merit: I
wish to speak to Mr. Vivian without control and without witness.”

Lord Glistonbury rose; and growing red and almost inarticulate with
anger, exclaimed, “Remember, Julia! remember, Lady Julia Lidhurst! that
if you say what you said you would say, and what I said you should not
say--I--Lord Glistonbury, your father--I, as well as all the rest of
your family, utterly disclaim and cast you off for ever!--You’ll be a
thing without fortune--without friends--without a name--without a being
in the world--Lady Julia Lidhurst!”

“I am well aware of that,” replied Lady Julia, growing quite pale, yet
without changing the determination of her countenance, or abating any
thing from the dignity of her manner: “I am well aware, that on what
I am about to do depends my having, or my ceasing from this moment to
have, fortune, friends, and a father.”

Lord Glistonbury stood still for a moment--fixed his eyes upon her as if
he would have read her soul; but, without seeking to elude his inquiry,
her countenance seemed to offer itself to his penetration.

“By Heaven, there is no understanding this girl!” cried his lordship.
“Mr. Vivian, I trust her to your honour--to your knowledge of the
world--to your good sense;--in short, sir, to your love and constancy.”

“And I, sir,” said Lady Julia, turning to Vivian, after her father
had left the room, and looking at Vivian so as to stop him short as he
approached, and to disconcert him in the commencement of a passionate
speech; “and I, too, sir, trust to your honour, whilst I deprecate your
love. Imprudent as I was in the first confidence I reposed in you, and
much as I have suffered by your rashness, I now stand determined
to reveal to you another yet more important, yet more humiliating
secret--You owe me no gratitude, sir!--I am compelled, by the
circumstances in which I am placed, either to deceive or to trust you.
I must either become your wife, and deceive you most treacherously; or
I must trust you entirely, and tell you why it would be shameful that I
should become your wife--shameful to me and to you.”

“To me!--Impossible!” cried Vivian, bursting into some passionate
expressions of love and admiration.

“Listen to me, sir; and do not make any of those rash professions, of
which you will soon repent. You think you are speaking to the same
Lady Julia you saw yesterday--No!--you are speaking to a very different
person--a few hours have made a terrible change. You see before you,
sir, one who has been, till this day, the darling and pride of her
father; who has lived in the lap of luxury; who has been flattered,
admired, by almost all who approached her; who had fortune, and rank,
and fair prospects in life, and youth, and spirits, and all the pride of
prosperity; who had, I believe, good dispositions, perhaps some talents,
and, I may say, a generous heart; who might have been,--but that is all
over--no matter what she might have been--she is

     ‘A tale for ev’ry prating she.’

Fallen!--fallen! fallen under the feet of those who worshipped
her!--fallen below the contempt of the contemptible!--Worse! worse!
fallen in her own opinion--never to rise again.”

Lady Julia’s voice failed, and she was forced to pause. She sunk upon a
seat, and hid her face--for some moments she neither saw nor heard; but
at last, raising her head, she perceived Vivian.

“You are in amazement, sir! and I see you pity me; but let me beg of you
to restrain your feelings--my own are as much as I can bear. O that I
could recall a few hours of my existence! But I have not yet been able
to tell you what has passed. My father, my friends, wish to conceal it
from you: but, whatever I have done, however low I have sunk, I will not
deceive, nor be an accomplice in deceit. From my own lips you shall hear
all. This morning at daybreak, not being able to sleep, and having some
suspicion that Mr. Russell would leave the castle, I rose, and whilst I
was dressing, I heard the trampling of horses in the court. I looked out
of my window, and saw Mr. Russell’s man saddling his master’s horse. I
heard Mr. Russell, a moment afterwards, order the servant to take the
horses to the great gate on the north road, and wait for him there,
as he intended to walk through the park. I thought these were the last
words I should ever hear him speak.--Love took possession of me--I stole
softly down the little staircase that leads from my turret to one of
the back doors, and got out of the castle, as I thought, unobserved: I
hurried on, and waited in the great oak wood, through which I knew Mr.
Russell would pass. When I saw him coming nearer and nearer to me, I
would have given the world to have been in my own room again--I hid
myself among the trees--yet, when he walked on in reverie without
noticing me, taking me probably for one of the servants, I could not
bear to think that this was the last moment I should ever see him, and I
exclaimed--I know not what; but I know that at the sound of my voice
Mr. Russell started, and never can I forget the look--Spare me the
rest!--No!--I will not spare myself--I offered my heart, my hand,--and
they were rejected!--In my madness I told him I regarded neither
wealth, nor rank, nor friends, nor--That I would rather live with him
in obscurity than be the greatest princess upon earth--I said this
and more--and I was rejected--And even at this moment, instead of the
vindictive passions which are said to fill the soul of a woman scorned,
I feel admiration for your noble friend: I have not done him justice;
I cannot repeat his words, or describe his manner. He persuaded, by his
eloquence compelled, me to return to this castle. He took from me all
hope; he destroyed by one word all my illusions--he told me that he
loves another. He has left me to despair, to disgrace; and yet I love,
esteem, and admire him, above all human beings! Admire one who despises
me!--Is it possible? I know not, but it is so--I have more to tell you,
sir!--As I returned to the castle, I was watched by Miss Strictland. How
she knew all that had passed, I cannot divine; perhaps it was by means
of some spy who followed me, and whom I did not perceive: for I neither
saw nor heard any thing but my passion. Miss Strictland communicated
her discovery immediately to my father. I have been these last two hours
before a family tribunal. My mother, with a coldness a thousand times
worse than my poor father’s rage, says, that I have only accomplished
her prophecies; that she always knew and told my father that I should be
a disgrace to my family. But no reproaches are equal to my own; I stand
self-condemned. I feel like one awakened from a dream. A few words!--a
single look from Mr. Russell!--how they have altered all my views,
all my thoughts! Two hours’ reflection--Two hours, did I say?--whole
years--a whole existence--have passed to me in the last two hours: I
am a different creature. But it is too late--too late!--Self-esteem is
gone!--happiness is over for me in this world.”

“Happiness over for you!” exclaimed Vivian in a tone expressive of the
deep interest he felt for her; “Self-esteem gone!--No! Lady Julia;
do not blame yourself so severely for what has passed! Blame the
circumstances in which you have been placed; above all, blame me--blame
my folly--my madness; your secret never would have been known, if I had
not--”

“I thank you,” interrupted Lady Julia, rising from her seat; “but no
consolation can be of any avail. It neither consoles nor justifies me
that others have been to blame.”

“Permit me, at least,” pursued Vivian, “to speak of my own sentiments
for one moment. Permit me to say, Lady Julia, that the confidence with
which you have just honoured me, instead of diminishing my attachment,
has so raised my admiration for your candour and magnanimity, that no
obstacles shall vanquish my constancy. I will wait respectfully, and,
if I can, patiently, till time shall have effaced from your mind these
painful impressions; I shall neither ask nor accept of the interference
or influence of your father, nor of any of your friends; I shall rely
solely on the operation of your own excellent understanding, and shall
hope for my reward from your noble heart.”

“You do not think it possible,” said Lady Julia, looking at Vivian with
dignified determination, “you do not think it possible, after all that
has passed, after all that I have told you, that I could so far degrade
myself or you, as to entertain any thoughts of becoming your wife?
I spoke to you, as I have done, sir, in the first place, to save you from
the misery of a vain attachment -- I know what that is; I therefore wish
to prevent others from feeling it. But I had another motive, which
regarded myself more than you. I confess I wished that Mr. Russell's
friend should not utterly despise me -- should not think of me merely as
a romantic, silly, perhaps forward girl. It has been my misfortune,
that the very desire I felt to improve myself; the best dispositions of
my heart; the perception of what was excellent; the enthusiasm for all that
was wise and good, from the circumstances in which I was placed, and from
the errours of my education, operated against me -- decided and accellerated
my ruin -- Ruin? -- Yes! is it not ruin for a young woman, like me, of
noble family, of high hopes -- beloved, respected as I was -- I cannot bear to think of it.
Farewell! Mr. Vivian.----You will not see me again. I shall obtain
permission to retire, and live with a relation in a distant part of the
country; where I shall no more be seen or heard of. My fortune will, I
hope, be of use to my sister.----My poor father!--I pity him; he loves
me: he loses his daughter for ever; worse than loses her! My mother,
too--I pity her! for, though she does not love me, she will suffer for
me; she will suffer more than my father, by the disgrace that would be
brought upon my family, if ever the secret should be publicly known. My
brother!--Oh, my beloved brother! he knows nothing yet of all this!--But
why do I grieve you with my agony of mind? Forget that Lady Julia
Lidhurst ever existed!--I wish you that happiness which I can never
enjoy--I wish you may deserve and win a heart capable of feeling real
love!--Adieu!”




CHAPTER XI.


Convinced that all farther pursuit of Lady Julia Lidhurst would be
vain, that it could tend only to increase her difficulties and his
mortification, Vivian saw that the best thing he could possibly do was
to leave Glistonbury. Thus he should relieve the whole family from the
embarrassment of his presence; and, by immediate change of scene and
of occupation, he had the best chance of recovering from his own
disappointment. If Lady Julia was to quit the castle, he could have
no inducement to stay; if her ladyship remained, his continuing in her
society would be still more dangerous to his happiness. Besides, he felt
offended with Lord Glistonbury, who evidently had wished to conceal from
him the truth; and, without considering what was just or honourable, had
endeavoured to secure, at all events, an establishment for his daughter,
and a connexion for his family. To the weight of these reasons must be
added a desire to see Mr. Russell, and to effect a reconciliation with
him. The accumulated force of all these motives had power to overcome
Vivian’s habitual indecision: his servant was surprised by an order to
have every thing ready for his journey to town immediately. Whilst his
man prepared to obey, or at least to meditate upon the cause of this
unusually decided order, our hero went in quest of Lord Glistonbury,
to pay his compliments to his lordship previous to his departure. His
lordship was in his daughter Julia’s dressing-room, and could not be
seen; but presently he came to Vivian in great hurry and distress of
mind.

“A sad stroke upon us, Mr. Vivian!--a sad stroke upon us all--but most
upon me; for she was the child of my expectations--I hear she has
told you every thing--you, also, have been very ill-used--Never was
astonishment equal to mine when I heard Miss Strictland’s story. I need
not caution you, Mr. Vivian, as to secrecy; you are a man of honour, and
you see the peace of our whole family is at stake. The girl is going
to a relation of ours in Devonshire.--Sha’n’t stay here--sha’n’t stay
here--Disgrace to my family--She who was my pride--and, after all, says
she will never marry.--Very well!--very well!--I shall never see her
again, that I am determined upon.--I told her, that if she did not
behave with common sense and propriety, in her last interview with you,
I would give her up--and so I will, and so I do.--The whole is Lady
Glistonbury’s fault--she never managed her rightly when she was a child.
Oh! I should put you on your guard in one particular--Miss Bateman knows
nothing of what has happened--I wish Miss Strictland knew as little--I
hate her. What business had she to play the spy upon my daughter? She
does well to be a prude, for she is as ugly as sin. But we are in her
power. She is to go to-morrow with Julia to Devonshire. It will make a
quarrel between me and Miss Bateman--no matter for that; for now, the
sooner we get rid of that Rosamunda, too, the better--she talks me dead,
and will let no one talk but herself. And, between you and me, all
this could not have happened, if she had looked after her charge
properly.--Not but what I think Miss Strictland was still less fit to
guide a girl of Julia’s genius and disposition. All was done wrong at
first, and I always said so to Lady Glistonbury. But, if the secret can
be kept--and _that_ depends on you, my dear friend--after six months’ or
a twelve-month’s _rustication_ with our poor parson in the country, you
will see how tamed and docile the girl will come back to us. This is my
scheme; but nobody shall know my whole mind but you--I shall tell her
I will never see her again; and that will pacify Lady Glistonbury, and
frighten Julia into submission. She says she’ll never marry.--Stuff!
Stuff!--You don’t believe her!--What man who has seen any thing of the
world ever believes such stuff?”

Vivian’s servant came into the room to ask his master some question
about horses.

“Going!--where? Going!--when? Going!--how?” cried Lord Glistonbury, as
soon as the servant withdrew. “Surely, you are not going to leave us,
Mr. Vivian?”

Vivian explained his reasons--Lord Glistonbury would not allow them any
weight, entreated and insisted that he should stay at least a few days
longer; for his going “just at this moment would seem quite like a
break up in the family, and would be the most unfriendly and cruel thing
imaginable.” Why Lord Glistonbury so earnestly pressed his stay, perhaps
even his lordship himself did not exactly know; for, with all the air of
being a person of infinite address and depth of design, his lordship was
in reality childishly inconsistent; what the French call _inconséquent_.
On any subject, great or small, where he once took it into his head, or,
as he called it, _made it a point_, that a thing should be so or so, he
was as peremptory, or, where he could not be peremptory, as anxious,
as if it were a matter of life and death. In his views there was no
perspective, no keeping--all objects appeared of equal magnitude; and
even now, when it might be conceived that his whole mind was intent upon
a great family misfortune, he, in the course of a few minutes, became
as eager about a mere trifle as if he had nothing else in the world to
think of. From the earnestness with which Lord Glistonbury urged him to
stay a few days, at least one day longer, Vivian was induced to believe
that it must be a matter of real consequence to his lordship--“And, in
his present state of distress, I cannot refuse such a request,” thought
Vivian. He yielded, therefore, to these solicitations, and consented to
stay a few days longer; though he knew the prolonging his visit would
be, in every respect, disagreeable.

At dinner Lord Glistonbury announced to the company that the physician
had advised change of air immediately for Lord Lidhurst; and that,
in consequence, his son would set out early the next morning for
Devonshire--that his daughter Julia wished to go with her brother, and
that Miss Strictland would accompany them. Lord Glistonbury apologized
for his daughter’s absence, “preparations for her journey so suddenly
decided upon,” &c. Lady Glistonbury and Lady Sarah looked terribly
grim whilst all this was saying; but the gravity and stiffness of their
demeanour did not appear any thing extraordinary to the greater part of
the company, who had no idea of what was going forward. The lawyer, the
captain, and the chaplain, however, interchanged significant looks; and
many times, during the course of the evening, they made attempts to draw
out Vivian’s thoughts, but they found him impenetrable. There was an
underplot of a quarrel between Miss Strictland and Miss Bateman,
to which Vivian paid little attention; nor was he affected, in the
slightest degree, by the Rosamunda’s declaration to Lord Glistonbury,
that she must leave his family, since she found that Miss Strictland had
a larger share than herself of his lordship’s confidence, and was, for
what reason she could not divine, to have the honour of accompanying
Lady Julia into Devonshire. Vivian perceived these quarrels, and heard
the frivolous conversation of the company at Glistonbury Castle without
interest, and with a sort of astonishment at the small motives by which
others were agitated, whilst his whole soul was engrossed by love and
pity for Lady Julia. In vain he hoped for another opportunity of seeing
and speaking to her. She never appeared. The next morning he rose at
daybreak that he might have the chance of seeing her: he begged Miss
Strictland to entreat her ladyship would allow him to say a few words
before she set out; but Miss Strictland replied, that she was assured
the request would be vain; and he thought he perceived that Miss
Strictland, though she affected to lament Lady Julia’s blindness to her
own interests and contumacy, in opposing her father’s wishes, was,
in reality, glad that she persisted in her own determination. Lord
Lidhurst, on account of the weak state of his health, was kept in
ignorance of every thing that could agitate him; and, when Vivian took
leave of him, the poor young man left many messages of kindness and
gratitude for Mr. Russell.

“I am sorry that he was obliged to leave me; for, ill or well, there is
no human being, I will not except any one but my sister Julia, whom I
should so much wish to have with me. Tell him so; and tell him--be
sure you remember my very words, for perhaps I shall never see him
again--tell him, that, living or dying, I shall feel grateful to him. He
has given me tastes and principles very different from those I had when
he came into this house. Even in sickness, I feel almost every hour
the advantage of my present love for literature. If I should live and
recover, I hope I shall do him some credit; and I trust my family
will join in my gratitude. Julia, my dear sister! why do you weep so
bitterly?--If I had seen you come into the room, I would not have spoken
of my health -- but is it not better, at all events, to use no disguise,
and to say the whole truth to our best friends. -- But I will not,
since you cannot bear it.”

Lord Glistonbury came up to tell them that Miss Strictland was ready.
“Mr. Vivian,” cried his lordship, “will you hand Julia into the
carriage?--Julia, Mr. Vivian is offering you his services. -- Lidhurst,
have you the key of the great trunk?”

Vivian, as he attended Lady Julia, had so much respect for her feelings,
that, though he had been waiting with extreme impatience for an
opportunity _to say a few words_, yet now he would not speak, but handed
her along the gallery, down the staircase, and across the great hall, in
profound silence. She seemed sensible of this forbearance; and, turning
to him at a moment when they could not be overheard, said, “It was not
from unkindness, Mr. Vivian, I refused to see you again, but to convince
you that my mind is determined--if you have any thing to say, I am ready
to hear it.”

“Is there nothing to be hoped from time?” said Vivian. “Your father, I
know, has hopes that----All I ask is, that you will not make any rash
resolutions.”

“I make none; but I tell _you_, for your own sake, not to cherish any
vain hope. My father does not know my mind sufficiently, therefore he
may deceive you; but I will not.----I thought, after the manner in which
I spoke to you yesterday, you would have had too much strength of mind
to have rendered this repetition of my sentiments necessary.----Attach
yourself elsewhere as soon as you can.--I sincerely wish your happiness.
Miss Strictland is waiting.--Farewell!”

She hurried forward to the carriage; and, when she was gone, Vivian
repented that he had seen her again, as it had only given them both
additional and fruitless pain.

What passed during some succeeding days at Glistonbury Castle he
scarcely knew; no trace remained in his mind of anything but the
confused noise of people, who had been talking, laughing, and diverting
themselves in a manner that seemed to him incomprehensible. He exerted
himself, however, so far as to write to Russell, to implore his
forgiveness, and to solicit a return of his friendship, which, in his
present state of unhappiness, was more necessary to him than ever. When
he had finished and despatched this letter, he sunk again into a sort of
reckless state, without hope or determination, as to his future life.
He could not decide whether he should go to his mother immediately on
leaving Glistonbury, or to Mr. Russell, or (which he knew was the best
course he could pursue) attend his duty in parliament, and, by plunging
at once into public business, change the course of his thoughts, and
force his mind to resume its energy. After altering his determination
twenty times, after giving at least a dozen contradictory orders about
his journey, his servant at last had his ultimatum, _for London_--the
carriage to be at the door at ten o’clock the next morning. Every thing
was ready at the appointed hour. Breakfast over, Vivian waited only to
pay his compliments to Lady Glistonbury, who had breakfasted in her own
apartment. Lady Sarah, with a manner as formal as usual, rose from the
breakfast-table, and said she would let her mother know that Mr.
Vivian was going. Vivian waited half an hour--an hour--two hours. Lady
Glistonbury did not appear, nor did Lady Sarah return. The company had
dispersed after the first half-hour. Lord Glistonbury began to believe
that the ladies did not mean to make their appearance. At length a
message came from Lady Glistonbury.--“Lady Glistonbury’s compliments to
Mr. Vivian--her ladyship was concerned that it was out of her power to
have the pleasure of seeing Mr. Vivian, as she was too much indisposed
to leave her room.--She and Lady Sarah wished him a very good journey.”

Vivian went up to his room for his gloves, which he missed at the moment
when he was going. Whilst he was opening the empty drawers one after
another, in search of his gloves, and, at the same time, calling
his servant to find them, he heard a loud scream from an adjoining
apartment. He listened again--all was silent; and he supposed that what
he had heard was not a scream: but, at that moment, Lady Sarah’s maid
flung open his door, and, running in with out-stretched arms, threw
herself at Vivian’s feet. Her sobs and tears prevented his understanding
one syllable she said. At last she articulated intelligibly, “Oh,
sir!--don’t be so cruel to go--my lady!--my poor lady! If you go, it
will kill Lady Sarah!”

“Kill Lady Sarah?--Why I saw her in perfect health this morning at
breakfast!”

“Dear, dear sir! you know nothing of the matter!” said the maid, rising,
and shutting the door: “you don’t know what a way she has been in ever
since the talk of your going--fits upon fits every night, and my lady,
her mother, and I up holding her--and none in the house knowing it but
ourselves. Very well at breakfast! Lord help us! sir. How little you
know of what she has suffered! Lord have mercy upon me! I would not be
a lady to be so much in love, and left so, for any thing in the whole
world. And my Lady Sarah keeps every thing so to herself;--if it was not
for these fits they would never have knowed she cared no more for you
than a stone.”

“And, probably you are quite mistaken,” said Vivian; “and that I have
nothing to do with the young lady’s illness. If she has fits, I am
very sorry for it; but I can’t possibly----Certainly, you are quite
mistaken!”

“Lord, sir!--mistaken! As if I could be mistaken, when I know my lady as
well as I know myself! Why, sir, I know from the time of the election,
when you was given to her by all the country--and to be sure when we
all thought it would be a match directly--and the Lord knows what put
it off!--I say, from that time, her heart was set upon you. Though she
never said a word to me, or any one, I knew how it was, through all her
coldness and, when she was low, I knew always how to raise her, by praising
of you--And to be sure, when you was in Lon’on so much with us, all
the town said, as all the country did afore, that to be sure it was to
be a match--But then that sad affair, with that artfullest of women,
that took you off from all that was good, and away, the Lord knows
where, to foreign parts!--Well! to be sure, I never shall forget the day
you come back again to us!--and the night of the ball!--and you dancing
with my lady, and all so happy; then, to be sure, all were sarten it was
to be immediately----And now to go and break my poor lady’s heart at the
last--Oh, sir, sir! if you could but see her, it would touch a heart of
marble!”

Vivian’s astonishment and dismay were so great, that he suffered
the girl, who was an unpractised creature, to go on speaking without
interruption: the warmth of affection with which she spoke of her lady,
also, surprised him: for, till this instant, he had no idea that any one
could love Lady Sarah Lidhurst; and the accounts she gave of the lady’s
sufferings not only touched his compassion, but worked upon his vanity.
“This cold, proud young lady that never loved none before, to think,”
 as her maid said, “that she should come to such a pass, as to be in fits
about him. And it was her belief that Lady Sarah never would recover it,
if he went away out of the castle this day.”

The ringing of a bell had repeatedly been heard, whilst Lady Sarah’s
maid was speaking; it now rang violently, and her name was called
vehemently from the adjoining apartment. “I must go, I _must_ go!--Oh,
sir! one day, for mercy’s sake! stay one day longer!”

Vivian, though he had been moved by this girl’s representations,
was determined to effect his retreat whilst it was yet in his power;
therefore he ran down stairs, and had gained the hall, where he was
shaking hands with Lord Glistonbury, when my Lady Glistonbury’s own
woman came in a great hurry to say, that her lady, finding herself a
little better now, and able to see Mr. Vivian, begged he would be so
good as to walk up to her dressing-room.

Vivian, with a heavy heart and slow steps, obeyed; there was no
refusing, no evading such a request. He summoned all his resolution, at
the same time saying to himself, as he followed his conductor along the
gallery, “It is impossible that I can ever be drawn in to marry Lady
Sarah.--This is a concerted plan, and I shall not be so weak as to be
the dupe of so gross an artifice.”

Lady Glistonbury’s maid showed him into her lady’s dressing-room and
retired. Lady Glistonbury was seated, and, without speaking, pointed to
a chair which was set opposite to her. “So! a preparation for a scene,”
 thought Vivian. He bowed, but, still keeping his hat in his hand, did
not sit down:--he was extremely happy to hear, that her ladyship found
herself something better--much honoured by her permitting him to pay
his respects, and to offer his grateful acknowledgments to her ladyship
before his departure from Glistonbury.

Her ladyship, still without speaking, pointed to the chair. Vivian
sat down, and looked as if he had “screwed his courage to the sticking
place.” Lady Glistonbury had sometimes a little nervous trembling of
her head, which was the only symptom of internal agitation that was ever
observable in her; it was now increased to a degree which Vivian had
never before seen.

“Are you in haste, sir, to be gone?” said Lady Glistonbury.

“Not if her ladyship had any commands for him; but otherwise, he had
intended, if possible, to reach town that night.”

“I shall not delay you many minutes, Mr. Vivian,” said her ladyship.
“You need not be under apprehension that Lady Glistonbury should seek to
detain you longer than your own inclinations induce you to stay; it is,
therefore, unnecessary to insult her with any appearance of haste or
impatience.”

Vivian instantly laid down his hat, and protested that he was not in
the slightest degree impatient: he should be very ungrateful, as well as
very ill-bred, if, after the most hospitable manner in which he had been
received and entertained at Glistonbury Castle, he could be in haste to
quit it. He was entirely at her ladyship’s orders.

Lady Glistonbury bowed formally--was again silent--the trembling of her
head very great--the rest of her form motionless.

“I have sent for you, Mr. Vivian,” said she, “that I might, before you
leave this castle, set you right on a subject which much concerns me.
From the representations of a foolish country girl, a maid-servant of my
daughter, Lady Sarah Lidhurst, which I have just discovered she has made
to you, I had reason to fear that you might leave Glistonbury with very
false notions----”

A cry was heard at this moment from the inner apartment, which made
Vivian start; but Lady Glistonbury, without noticing it, went on
speaking.

“With notions very injurious to my daughter Sarah; who, if I know any
thing of her, would rather, if it were so ordained, go out of this
world, than condescend to any thing unbecoming her sex, her education,
and her family.”

Vivian, struck with respect and compassion for the mother, who spoke to
him in this manner, was now convinced that there had been no concerted
plan to work upon his mind, that the maid had spoken without the
knowledge of her lady; and the more proudly solicitous Lady Glistonbury
showed herself to remove what she called the false impression from his
mind, the more he was persuaded that the girl had spoken the truth. He
was much embarrassed between his good-nature and his dread of becoming a
sacrifice to his humanity.

He replied in general terms to Lady Glistonbury, that he had the highest
respect for Lady Sarah Lidhurst, and that no opinion injurious to her
could be entertained by him.

“Respect she must command from all,” said Lady Glistonbury; “_that_ it
is out of any man’s power to refuse her: as to the rest, she leaves you,
and I leave you, sir, to your own conscience.”

Lady Glistonbury rose, and so did Vivian. He hoped that neither her
ladyship nor Lady Sarah had any cause----He hesitated; the words, _to
reproach, to complain, to be displeased_, all came to his lips; but each
seemed improper; and, none other being at hand to convey his meaning,
he could not finish his sentence: so he began another upon a new
construction, with “I should be much concerned if, in addition to all my
other causes of regret in leaving Glistonbury Castle, I felt that I had
incurred Lady Glistonbury’s or Lady Sarah’s displea--disapprobation.”

“As to that, sir,” said Lady Glistonbury, “I cannot but have my own
opinion of your conduct; and you can scarcely expect, I apprehend, that
a mother, such as I am, should not feel some disapprobation of conduct,
which has----made her daughter so----In short, sir, you must be sensible
of what all the world have said -- and you are as fully aware, as I can be
of the disadvantage to a young lady of such reports -- of the breaking off
of such things----But I am doomed, and trust I shall bear with resignation,
to see the ruin of all my hopes--There is my only son dying--I know we are to
lose him--His sister, worse than dead--I always foresaw _that_--But my
daughter Sarah!--this I did not foresee----Sir, I beg I may not detain you--
I have the honour to wish you a good journey and much happiness.”

An attendant came from an inner apartment with a message! from Lady
Sarah, who was worse, and wished to see her mother--“Immediately!--tell
her, immediately!”

The servant returned with the answer. Vivian was retiring, but he
came back, for he saw at that moment a convulsive motion contract Lady
Glistonbury’s face: she made an effort to walk; but if Vivian had
not supported her instantly, she must have fallen. She endeavoured to
disengage herself from his assistance, and again attempted to walk.

“For God’s sake, lean upon me, madam!” said Vivian, much alarmed. With
his assistance, she reached the door of the inner room: summoning all
the returning powers of life, she then withdrew her arm from his, and
pointing back to the door at which Vivian entered, she said, “That is
your way, sir.”

“Pardon me--I cannot go--I cannot leave you at this moment,” said
Vivian.

“This is my daughter’s apartment, sir,” said Lady Glistonbury, stopping,
and standing still and fixed. Some of the attendants within, hearing her
ladyship’s voice, opened the door; Lady Glistonbury made an effort
to prevent it, but in vain: the chamber was darkened, but as the door
opened, the wind from an open window blew back the curtain, and some
light fell upon a canopy bed, where Lady Sarah lay motionless, her eyes
closed, and pale as death; one attendant chafing her temples, another
rubbing her feet: she looked up just after the door opened, and, raising
her head, she saw Vivian--a gleam of joy illumined her countenance, and
coloured her cheek.

“Sir,” repeated Lady Glistonbury, “this is my daughter’s----”

She could articulate no more. She fell across the threshold, struck with
palsy. Her daughter sprang from the bed, and, with Vivian’s assistance,
raised and carried Lady Glistonbury to an arm-chair near the open
window, drew back the curtain, begged Vivian to go to her father, and
instantly to despatch a messenger for medical assistance. Vivian sent
his own servant, who had his horse ready at the door, and he bid the man
go as fast as he could.

“Then you don’t leave Glistonbury to-day, sir?” said the servant.

“Do as I order you--Where’s Lord Glistonbury?”

His lordship, with the newspapers and letters open in his hand,
came up--but they dropped on hearing the intelligence that Vivian
communicated. His lordship was naturally humane and good-natured; and
the shock was greater, perhaps, to him, from the sort of enmity in which
he lived with Lady Glistonbury.

“I dread to go up stairs,” said he. “For God’s sake, Vivian, don’t
leave me in this distress!--do order your carriage away!----Put up Mr.
Vivian’s carriage.”

Lady Sarah’s maid came to tell them that Lady Glistonbury had recovered
her speech, and that she had asked, “if Mr. Vivian was gone?”

“Do come up with me,” cried Lord Glistonbury, “and she will see you are
not gone.”

“Here’s my lord and Mr. Vivian, my lady,” said the girl.

Then, turning to Lady Glistonbury’s woman, she added, in a loud whisper,
“Mr. Vivian won’t go to-day.”

Lady Sarah gave her maid some commission, which took her out of the
room. Lady Sarah, no longer the formal, cold, slow personage whom
Vivian detested, now seemed to him, and not only seemed but was, quite
a different being, inspired with energy, and quickness, and presence
of mind: she forgot herself, and her illness, and her prudery, and
her love, and every other consideration, in the sense of her mother’s
danger. Lady Glistonbury had but imperfectly recovered her recollection.
At one moment she smiled on Vivian, and tried to stretch out her hand to
him, as she saw him standing beside Lady Sarah. But when he approached
Lady Glistonbury, and spoke to her, she seemed to have some painful
recollection, and, looking round the room, expressed surprise and
uneasiness at his being there. Vivian retired; and Lord Glistonbury, who
was crying like a child, followed, saying, “Take me out with
you--Dr. G---- ought to be here before now--I’ll send for another
physician!--Very shocking--very shocking--at Lady Glistonbury’s time of
life, too--for she is not an old woman by any means. Lady Glistonbury
is eighteen months younger than I am!--Nobody knows how soon it may be
their turn!--It’s very shocking!--If I had known she was ill, I would
have had advice for her sooner. She is very patient--too patient--a
great deal too patient. She never will complain--never tells what she
feels, body or mind--at least never tells _me_; but that may be my fault
in some measure. Should be very sorry Lady Glistonbury went out of the
world with things as they are now between us. Hope to God she will get
over this attack!--Hey! Mr. Vivian?”

Vivian said whatever he could to fortify this hope, and was glad to see
Lord Glistonbury show feelings of this sort. The physician arrived, and
confirmed these hopes by his favourable prognostics. In the course
of the day and night her face, which had been contracted, resumed
its natural appearance; she recovered the use of her arm: a certain
difficulty of articulation, and thickness of speech, with what the
physician called hallucination of mind, and a general feebleness of
body, were all the apparent consequences of this stroke. She was not
herself sensible of the nature of the attack, or clear in her ideas of
any thing that had passed immediately previous to it. She had only an
imperfect recollection of her daughter’s illness, and of some hurry
about Mr. Vivian’s going away. She was, however, well enough to go into
her dressing-room, where Vivian went to pay his respects to her, with
Lord Glistonbury. By unremitting exertions, and unusual cheerfulness,
Lady Sarah succeeded in quieting her mother’s confused apprehensions on
her account. When out of Lady Glistonbury’s hearing, all the attendants
and the physicians repeatedly expressed fear that Lady Sarah would
over-fatigue and injure herself by this extraordinary energy; but her
powers of body and mind seemed to rise with the necessity for exertion;
and, on this great occasion, she suddenly discovered a warmth and
strength of character, of which few had ever before discerned even the
slightest symptoms.

“Who would have expected this from Sarah?” whispered Lord Glistonbury to
Vivian. “Why, her sister did not do more for me when I was ill! I always
knew she loved her mother, but I thought it was in a quiet, commonplace
way--Who knows but she loves me too?--or might--” She came into the
room at this moment--“Sarah, my dear,” said his lordship, “where are my
letters and yesterday’s papers, which I never read?--I’ll see if there
be any thing in them that can interest your mother.”

Lord Glistonbury opened the papers, and the first article of public news
was, “a dissolution of parliament confidently expected to take place
immediately.” This must put an end to Vivian’s scheme of going to town
to attend his duty in parliament. “But, may be, it is only newspaper
information.” It was confirmed by all Lord Glistonbury and Vivian’s
private letters. A letter from his mother, which Vivian now for the
first moment had time to peruse, mentioned the dissolution of parliament
as certain; she named her authority, which could not be doubted; and, in
consequence, she had sent down supplies of wine for an election; and she
said that she would “be immediately at Castle Vivian, to keep open house
and open heart for her son. Though not furnished,” she observed, “the
castle would suit the better all the purposes of an election; and
she should not feel any inconvenience, for her own part, let the
accommodations be what they might.”

Lord Glistonbury directly proposed and insisted upon Lady Mary
Vivian’s making Glistonbury her head-quarters. Vivian objected: Lady
Glistonbury’s illness was an ostensible and, he hoped, would be a
sufficient excuse for declining the invitation. But Lord Glistonbury
persisted: “Lady Glistonbury, he was sure, would wish it--nothing would
be more agreeable to her.” His lordship’s looks appealed to Lady Sarah,
but Lady Sarah was silent; and, when her father positively required her
opinion, by adding, “Hey! Sarah?” she rather discouraged than pressed
the invitation. She said, that though she was persuaded her mother
would, if she were well, be happy to have the pleasure of seeing Lady
Mary Vivian; yet she could not, in her mother’s present situation,
venture to decide how far her health might be able to stand any election
bustle.

Lady Sarah said this with a very calm voice, but blushed extremely as
she spoke; and, for the first time, Vivian thought her not absolutely
plain; and, for the first time, he thought even the formality and
deliberate coolness of her manner were not disagreeable. He liked her
more, at this moment, than he had ever imagined it possible he could
like Lady Sarah Lidhurst; but he liked her chiefly because she did not
press him into her service, but rather forwarded his earnest wish to get
away from Glistonbury.

Lord Glistonbury appealed to the physician, and asked whether company
and amusement were not “the best things possible for his patient?
Lady Glistonbury should not be left alone, surely! Her mind should be
interested and amused; and an election would be a fortunate circumstance
just at present!”

The physician qualified the assent which his lordship’s peremptory tone
seemed to demand, by saying, “that certainly moderate amusement, and
whatever interested without agitating her ladyship, would be salutary.”
 His lordship then declared that he would leave it to Lady Glistonbury
herself to decide: quitting the end of the room where they were holding
their consultation, he approached her ladyship to explain the matter.
But Lady Sarah stopped him, beseeching so earnestly that no appeal might
be made to her mother, that Vivian was quite moved; and he settled the
business at once to general satisfaction, by declaring that, though
neither he nor Lady Mary Vivian could think of intruding as inmates
at present, yet that they should, as soon as Lady Glistonbury’s health
would permit, be as much at Glistonbury Castle as possible; and that the
short distance from his house would make it, he hoped, not inconvenient
to his lordship for all election business. Lord Glistonbury acceded, and
Lady Sarah appeared gratefully satisfied. His lordship, who always took
the task of explanation upon himself, now read the paragraph about the
dissolution aloud to Lady Glistonbury; informed her, that Lady Mary
Vivian was coming immediately to the country; and that they should hope
to see Lady Mary and Mr. Vivian almost every day, though he could
not prevail upon them to take up their abode during the election
at Glistonbury. Lady Glistonbury listened, and tried, and seemed to
understand--bowed to Mr. Vivian and smiled, and said she remembered he
was often at Glistonbury during the last election--that she was happy
to hear she should have the pleasure to see Lady Mary Vivian--that some
people disliked _election times_, but for her part she did not, when she
was strong. Indeed, the last election she recollected with particular
pleasure--she was happy that Lord Glistonbury’s interest was of
service to Mr. Vivian. Then “she hoped his canvass _to-day_ had been
successful?”--and asked some questions that showed her mind had become
confused, and that she was confounding the past with the present. Lady
Sarah and Mr. Vivian said a few words to set her right--she looked
first at one, and then at the other, listening, and then said--“I
understand--God bless you both.” Vivian took up his hat, and looked out
of the window, to see if his carriage was at the door.

“Mr. Vivian wishes you a good morning, madam,” said Lady Sarah: “he is
going to Castle Vivian, to get things ready for Lady Mary’s arrival.”

“I wish you health and happiness, sir,” said Lady Glistonbury,
attempting to rise, whilst some painful reminiscence altered her
countenance.

“Pray do not stir, don’t disturb yourself, Lady Glistonbury. I shall pay
my respects to your ladyship again as soon as possible.”

“And pray bring me good news of the election, and how the poll stands
to-morrow, Mr. Vivian,” added her ladyship, as he left the room.




CHAPTER XII.


Vivian, who had felt oppressed and almost enslaved by his compassion,
breathed more freely when he at last found himself in his carriage,
driving away from Glistonbury. His own castle, and the preparations for
his mother’s arrival, and for the expected canvass, occupied him so much
for the ensuing days, that he had scarcely time to think of Lady Julia
or of Lady Sarah, of Russell or Selina: he could neither reflect on the
past, nor anticipate the future; the present, the vulgar present,
full of upholsterers, and paper-hangers, and butlers, and grooms, and
tenants, and freeholders, and parasites, pressed upon his attention with
importunate claims. It has been said, by a noble and gallant author, that
the great, the important business of, a woman's life, is love; but, except
in novels, love forms but a small share of the various business of the
generality, either of men or women The dissolution of parliament took place. Lady
Mary Vivian arrived almost as soon as the newspaper that brought this
intelligence: with her came a new set of thoughts, all centering in
the notion of her son’s consequence in the world, and of his
happiness--ideas which were too firmly associated in her mind ever to be
separated. She said that she had regretted his having made such a long
stay in the country during the last session, because he had missed
opportunities of distinguishing himself farther in parliament. The
preceding session her ladyship had received gratifying compliments on
her son’s talents, and on the figure he had _already_ made in public
life; she felt her self-love as well as her affection interested in
his continuing his political career with spirit and success. “As to the
present election,” she observed, “there could be little doubt that he
would be re-elected with the assistance of the Glistonbury interest;
and,” added her ladyship, smiling significantly, “I fancy your interest
is pretty strong in that quarter. The world has given you by turns to
Lady Julia and Lady Sarah Lidhurst; and I am asked continually which of
the Lady Lidhursts you are in love with. One of these ladies certainly
must be my daughter-in-law; pray, if you know, empower me to say which.”
 Lady Mary Vivian spoke but half in earnest, till the extraordinary
commotion her words created in her son, convinced her that the report
had not, now at least, been mistaken.

“Next to Miss Selina Sidney,” continued Lady Mary, “who, after her
positive and long persisted-in refusal, is quite out of the question, I
have, my dear son, always wished to see you married to one of the
Lady Lidhursts; and, of course, Lady Julia’s talents, and beauty, and
youth----”

Vivian interrupted and hastily told his mother that Lady Julia Lidhurst
was as much out of the question as Miss Sidney could be; for that he had
offered himself, and had been refused; and that he had every reason to
believe that the determination of his second mistress against him would
be at least as absolute and unconquerable as that of his first. His
mother was in amazement. That her son could be refused by Lady Julia
Lidhurst appeared a moral and political impossibility, especially when
the desire for a connexion between the families had been so obvious on
the side of the Glistonburys. What could be the meaning of this? Lady
Julia was perhaps under an error, and fancied he was some way engaged to
Miss Sidney; “or, perhaps,” said Lady Mary, who had a ready wit for
the invention of delicate distresses, “perhaps there is some difficulty
about the eldest sister, Lady Sarah; for you know the first winter you
were given to her.--Ay, that must be the case. I will go to Glistonbury
to-morrow, and I will have Lady Julia to myself for five minutes: I
think I have some penetration, and I will know the truth.”

Lady Mary was again surprised, by hearing from her son that Lady
Julia was not at Glistonbury--that she was gone with her brother into
Devonshire. So there was a dead silence for some minutes, succeeded by
an exclamation from Lady Mary, “There is some grand secret here--I
must know it!” Her ladyship forthwith commenced a close and able
cross-examination, which Vivian stopped at last by declaring that he
was not at liberty to speak upon the subject: he knew, he said, that his
mother was of too honourable and generous a temper to press him farther.
His mother was perfectly honourable, but at the same time extremely
curious; and though she continually repeated, “I will not ask you
another question--I would not upon any account lead you to say a
syllable that could betray any confidence reposed in you, my dear son;”
 yet she indulged herself in a variety of ingenious conjectures: “I know
it is so;” or, “I am sure that I have guessed now, but I don’t ask
you to tell me.--You do right to deny it.”--Amongst the variety of her
conjectures, Lady Mary did not find out the truth; she was prepossessed
by the idea that Russell was attached to Selina Sidney--a secret which
her own penetration had discovered whilst her son was abroad with
Mrs. Wharton, and which she thought no mortal living knew but herself.
Pre-occupied with this notion, Russell was now omitted in all her
combinations. His having quitted Glistonbury did not create any
suspicion of the real cause of his sudden departure, because there was
a sufficient reason for his going to the north to see his sick relation;
and Lady Mary was too good a philosopher to assign two causes for the
same event, when she had found one that was adequate to the production
of the effect. She therefore quietly settled it in her imagination, that
Lady Julia Lidhurst was going to be married immediately to a certain
young nobleman, who had been lately at Glistonbury whilst they were
acting plays. The next day she went with Vivian to Glistonbury Castle;
for, waiving all the ceremonials of visiting, she was anxious to see
poor Lady Glistonbury, of whose illness she had been apprised, in
general terms, by her son. An impulse of curiosity, mixed perhaps with
motives of regard for her good friend Lady Glistonbury, hastened this
visit. They found Lady Glistonbury much better; she looked nearly as
well as she had done before this stroke; and she had now recovered her
memory, and the full use of her understanding. Vivian observed, that
she and Lady Sarah were both convinced, by Lady Mary Vivian’s curiosity,
that he had given no hint of any thing which they did not wish to be
known: and the pleasurable consciousness of his integrity disposed him
to be pleased with them. Lord Glistonbury, on his side, was convinced
that Vivian had behaved honourably with respect to his daughter Julia;
so all parties were well satisfied with each other. His lordship
answered Lady Mary Vivian’s inquiries after his son and his daughter
Julia by saying, that Miss Strictland had just returned to Glistonbury
with rather more favourable accounts of Lord Lidhurst’s health, and that
Julia and he were now at his brother the Bishop of ----‘s. Between this
brother and my Lord Glistonbury there had never been any great intimacy,
their characters and their politics being very different. The moment
Lady Mary Vivian heard Lord Glistonbury pronounce, with such unusual
cordiality, the words, “my brother the bishop,” she recollected that the
bishop had a very amiable, accomplished, and remarkably handsome son;
so she arranged directly in her imagination that this was the person to
whom Lady Julia was engaged. Being now thoroughly convinced that
this last conjecture was just, she thought no more about Lady Julia’s
affairs; but turned her attention to Lady Sarah, whose cold and guarded
manners, however, resisted her utmost penetration. Disappointed in all
her attempts to lead to sentiment or love, the conversation at last ran
wholly upon the approaching election, upon the canvass, and the strength
of the various interests of the county; on all which subjects Lady Sarah
showed surprisingly exact information. Presently Lord Glistonbury took
Vivian with him to his study to examine some poll-book, and then
put into his hands a letter from Lady Julia Lidhurst, which had been
enclosed in one to himself.

“I told you that I intended to _rusticate_ Julia,” said his lordship,
“with a poor parson and his wife--relations, distant relations of
ours in Devonshire; but this plan has been defeated by my foolish good
brother the bishop. On their journey they passed close by his palace;
I charged Miss Strictland to be incog.; but they stayed to rest in the
town, for Lidhurst was fatigued; and some of the bishop’s people found
them out, and the bishop sent for them, and at last came himself. He was
so sorry for Lidhurst’s illness, and, as Miss Strictland says, so much
charmed with Julia, whom he had not seen since she was a child, that he
absolutely took possession of them; and Julia has made her party good
with him, for he writes me word he cannot part with her; that I must
allow her to remain with him; and that they will take all possible care
of Lyndhurst’s health. I believe I must yield this point to the bishop;
for altogether it looks better that Julia should be at the palace than
at the parsonage; and, though my poor brother has not the knowledge of
the world one could wish, or that is necessary to bring this romantic
girl back to reason, yet--But I keep you from reading your letter, and
I see you are impatient--Hey?--very natural!--but, I am afraid, all in
vain--I’ll leave you in peace. At any rate,” added Lord Glistonbury,
“you know I have always stood your firm friend in this business; and you
know I’m discreet.”

Vivian never felt so grateful for any instance of his lordship’s
friendship and discretion as for that which he gave at this moment, by
quitting the room, and leaving him in peace to read his letter.




CHAPTER XIII.


“Before you open this letter, you will have heard, probably, that my
uncle, the Bishop of ----, has taken me under his protection. I cannot
sufficiently regret that I was not a few years, a few months, sooner,
blessed with such a Mentor. I never, till now, knew how much power
kindness has to touch the mind in the moment of distress; nor did I
ever, till now, feel how deeply the eloquence of true piety sinks into
the heart. This excellent friend will, I hope, in time restore me to my
better self. From the abstraction, the selfishness of passion, I think
I am already somewhat recovered. After being wholly absorbed by one
sentiment, I begin to feel again the influence of other motives, and to
waken to the returning sense of social duty. Among the first objects to
which, in recovering from this trance, or this fever of the soul, I have
power to turn my attention, your happiness, sir, next to that of my
own nearest relations, I find interests me most. After giving you this
assurance, I trust you will believe that, to insure the felicity, or
even to restore the health and preserve the life of any relation
or friend I have upon earth, I should not think myself justified in
attempting to influence your mind to any thing which I did not sincerely
and firmly believe would be for your permanent advantage as well as for
theirs. Under the solemn faith of this declaration, I hope that you will
listen to me with patience and confidence. From all that I have myself
seen, and from all that I have heard of your character, I am convinced
that your wife should be a woman of a disposition precisely opposite, in
many respects, to mine. Your character is liable to vary, according to
the situations in which you are placed; and is subject to sudden but
transient impressions from external circumstances. You have hitherto had
a friend who has regulated the fluctuations of your passions; now that
he is separated from you, how much will you feel the loss of his cool
and steady judgment! Should you not, therefore, in that bosom friend, a
wife, look for a certain firmness and stability of character, capable
of resisting, rather than disposed to yield, to sudden impulse; a
character, not of enthusiasm, but of duty; a mind, which, instead of
increasing, by example and sympathy, any defects of your own--pardon the
expression--should correct or compensate these by opposite qualities?
And supposing that, with such sobriety and strength of character as I
have described, there should be connected a certain slowness, formality,
and coldness of manner, which might not at first be attractive to a man
of your vivacity, let not this repel you: when once you have learned
to consider this manner as the concomitant and indication of qualities
essential to your happiness, it would, I am persuaded, become agreeable
to you; especially as, on nearer observation, you would soon discover
that, beneath that external coldness, under all that snow and ice, there
is an accumulated and concentrated warmth of affection.

“Of this, sir, you must lately have seen an example in my own family.
At the moment when my poor mother was struck with palsy, you saw my
sister’s energy; and her character, probably, then appeared to you in a
new point of view. From this burst of latent affection for a parent, you
may form some idea what the power of the passion of love would be in her
soul; some idea, I say; for I am persuaded that none but those who
know her as well as I do can form an adequate notion of the strength of
attachment of which she is capable. Am I mistaken, Mr. Vivian, in thinking,
that it would be necessary to your happiness to be beloved both with
ardent and constant affection? Certainly, I cannot be mistaken on this
point. There is another, of which I feel equally certain--that you would
be more likely to inspire a strong attachment in a mind like my sister's,
than in such a heart as mine. Let it not wound your pride, or any of
your feelings, if I tell you, that, even if my affections were at my
own disposal, and if no past circumstances prevented the possibility
of my thinking of you as a lover, I could not feel the passion of love
for a man of your disposition. There must be superior strength, decision,
and loftiness of character; there must be something of the moral sublime,
to seize the imagination, and touch my heart. My siste, on the contrary,
admires more vivacity and generosity of character, and would be
capitvated, in a lover, by those qualities and accomplishments, for
which you are eminently distinguished. Certain of the excellence of
your disposition and of your principles, and conscious that her own
firmness of mind would prevent any danger from the vacillations of
your easy temper, she would, as your wife, become more and more attached
to you, even from what you may think your defects, because she would
feel the continual sense of being useful and necessary to your happiness.

“You will be surprised, perhaps, sir, to hear me reason so coolly for
others on a subject where I have acted so rashly for myself; and you
may feel no inclination to listen to the advice of one who has shown so
little prudence in her own affairs: therefore, having stated my reasons,
and suggested my conclusions, I leave you to apply them as you think
proper; and I shall only add, that the accomplishment of my wishes, on
this subject, would give me peculiar satisfaction. It would relieve my
mind from part of a weight of self-reproach. I have made both my parents
unhappy. I have reason to fear that the shock my mother received, by my
means, contributed much to her late illness. An event that would
restore my whole family to happiness must, therefore, be to me the most
desirable upon earth. I should feel immediate relief and delight, even
in the hope of contributing to it by any influence I can have over your
mind. And, independently of the pleasure and pride I should feel
in securing my sister’s happiness and yours, I should enjoy true
satisfaction, sir, in that intimate friendship with you, which only the
ties of such near relationship could permit or justify. You will accept
of this assurance, instead of the trite and insulting, because unmeaning
or unsafe, offer of friendship, which ladies sometimes make to those who
have been their lovers.

“JULIA LIDHURST.

“---- Palace:”


At the first reading of this letter, Vivian felt nothing but a renewal
of regret for having lost all chance of obtaining the affections of the
person by whom it was written: on a second perusal, he was moved by the
earnest expression of her wishes for his happiness; and the desire to
gratify her, on a point on which she was so anxious, influenced him much
more than any of her arguments. Whatever good sense the letter contained
was lost upon him; but all the sentiment operated with full force, yet
not with sufficient power to conquer the repugnance he still felt to
Lady Sarah’s person and manners. Lord Glistonbury made no inquiries
concerning the contents of his daughter Julia’s letter; but, as far
as politeness would permit, he examined Vivian’s countenance when he
returned to the drawing-room. Lady Glistonbury’s manner was as calm as
usual; but the slight shake of her head was a sufficient indication
of her internal feelings. Lady Sarah looked pale, but so perfectly
composed, that Vivian was convinced she, at least, knew nothing of
her sister’s letter. So great indeed was the outward composure, and so
immoveable was Lady Sarah, that it provoked Lady Mary past endurance;
and as they drove home in the evening, she exclaimed, “I never saw
such a young woman as Lady Sarah Lidhurst! She is a stick, a stone, a
statue--she has completely satisfied my mind on one point. I own that
when I found Lady Julia was out of the question, I did begin to think
and wish that Lady Sarah might be my daughter-in-law, because she
has really been so carefully brought up, and the connexion with the
Glistonbury family is so desirable: then I had a notion, before I saw
her this morning, that the girl liked you, and might be really capable
of attachment; but now, indeed, I am convinced of the folly of that
notion. She has no feeling--none upon earth--scarcely common sense!
She thinks of nothing but how she holds her elbows. The formality and
importance with which she went on cutting off ends of worsted from that
frightful tapestry work, whilst I talked of you, quite put me out of all
manner of patience. She has no feeling--none upon earth!”

“Oh, ma’am,” said Vivian, “you do her injustice: she certainly has
feeling--for her mother.”

“Ay, for her mother, may be! a kind of mechanical affection!”

“But, ma’am, if you had seen her at the time that her mother was struck
with palsy!”

Much to his own surprise, Vivian found himself engaged in a defence, and
almost in an eulogium upon Lady Sarah; but the injustice of his mother’s
attack, on this point, was, he knew, so great, that he could not join in
Lady Mary’s invective.

“Why, my dear Charles!” said she, “do you recollect, on this very road,
as we were returning from Glistonbury Castle, this time two years, you
called Lady Sarah a petrifaction?”

“Yes, ma’am; because I did not know her then.”

“Well, my dear, I must have time to analyze her more carefully, and
I suppose I shall discover, as you have done, that she is not a
petrifaction. So, then, Lady Sarah really is to be the woman after all.
I am content, but I absolutely cannot pretend to like her--I like the
connexion, however; and the rest is your affair.--You haven’t proposed
yet?”

“Bless me! no, ma’am! God forbid! How fast your imagination goes, my
dear mother!--Is there no difference between saying, that a woman is not
a petrifaction, and being in love with her?”

“In love! I never said a word about being in love--I know that’s
impossible--I asked only if you had proposed for her?”

“Dear ma’am, no!”

Lady Mary expressed her satisfaction; and, perhaps, the injustice with
which she continued, for some days, to asperse Lady Sarah Lidhurst, as
being unfeeling, served her more, in Vivian’s opinion, than any other
mode in which she could have spoken of her ladyship. Still he felt glad
that he had not _yet proposed_. He had not courage either to recede or
advance; circumstances went on, and carried him along with them, without
bringing him to any decision. The business of the election proceeded;
every day Lord Glistonbury was with him, or he was at Glistonbury
Castle; every hour he saw more plainly the expectations that were
formed: sometimes he felt that he was inevitably doomed to fulfil these,
and at other times he cherished the hope that Lady Julia would soon
return home, and that, by some fortunate revolution, she might yet be
his. He had not now the advantage of Russell’s firmness to support
him in this emergency. Russell’s answer to his letter was so coolly
determined, and he so absolutely declined interfering farther in his
affairs, that Vivian saw no hopes of regaining his friendship, or of
benefiting by his counsels. Thus was Vivian in all the helplessness
and all the horrors of indecision, when an event took place, which
materially changed the face of affairs in the Glistonbury family. Just
at the time when the accounts of his health were the most favourable,
and when his friends were deceived by the most sanguine hopes of his
recovery, Lord Lidhurst died. His mother was the only person in
the family who was prepared for this catastrophe: they dreaded to
communicate the intelligence to her, lest it should bring on another
attack of her dreadful malady; but to their astonishment, she heard it
with calm resignation,--said she had long foreseen this calamity, and
that she submitted to the will of Heaven. After pity for the parents who
lost this amiable and promising young man, heir to this large fortune
and to this splendid title, people began to consider what change would
be made in the condition of the rest of the family. The Lady Lidhursts,
from _being very small fortunes_, became heiresses to a large
estate. The earldom of Glistonbury was to devolve to a nephew of Lord
Glistonbury, in case the Lady Lidhursts should not marry, or should not
have heirs male; but, in case they should marry, the title was to go
to the first son. All these circumstances were of course soon known and
talked of in the neighbourhood; and many congratulated Vivian upon the
great accession of fortune, and upon the high expectations of the lady
to whom they supposed him engaged.

On the first visit which Vivian and his mother paid after the death of
Lord Lidhurst at Glistonbury Castle, they found there a young man very
handsome, but of a dark, reserved countenance, whose physiognomy and
manner immediately prepossessed them against him; on his part, he seemed
to eye them with suspicion, and to be particularly uneasy whenever
Vivian either mentioned the election or approached Lady Sarah. This
young man was Mr. Lidhurst, Lord Glistonbury’s nephew and heir-at-law.
It was obvious, almost at first sight, that the uncle disliked the
nephew; but it was not so easy to perceive that the nephew despised the
uncle. Mr. Lidhurst, though young, was an excellent politician; and his
feelings were always regulated by his interests. He had more abilities
than Lord Glistonbury, less vanity, but infinitely more ambition. In
Lord Glistonbury, ambition was rather affected, as an air suited to
his rank, and proper to increase his consequence: Mr. Lidhurst’s was an
earnest, inordinate ambition, yet it was cold, silent, and calculating;
his pride preyed upon him inwardly, but it never hurried him into saying
or doing an extravagant thing. Those who were not actuated solely
by ambition, he always looked upon as fools, and those who were, he
considered, in general, as knaves: the one he marked as dupes, the other
as rivals. He had been at the Bishop of ----‘s, during Lord Lidhurst’s
illness, and at the time of his death. Ever since Lady Julia’s arrival
at the bishop’s, he had foreseen the probability of this event, and had,
in consequence of the long-sightedness of his views, endeavoured to make
himself agreeable to her. He found this impossible; but was, however,
easily consoled by hearing that she had resolved never to marry; he only
hoped that she would keep her resolution; and he was now at Glistonbury
Castle, in the determination to propose for his other cousin, Lady
Sarah, who would, perhaps, equally well secure to him his objects.

“Well! my dear Vivian,” said Lord Glistonbury, drawing him aside, “how
d’ye relish my nephew, Marmaduke Lidhurst? Need not be afraid to speak
the truth, for I tell you at once that he is no particular favourite
here; not _en bonne odeur_; but that’s only between you and me. He
thinks that I don’t know that he considers me as a shallow fellow,
because I haven’t my head crammed with a parcel of statistical tables,
all the fiscal and financiering stuff which he has at his calculating
fingers’ ends; but I trust that I am almost as good a politician as he
is, and I’m free to believe, have rather more knowledge of the world--

     ‘In men, not books, experienced was my lord’--

Hey? Hey, Vivian? and can see through him with half an eye, I can tell
him.--Wants to get Lady Sarah--Yes, yes; but never came near us till we
lost my poor boy--he won’t win Lady Sarah either, or I’m much mistaken.
Did you observe how jealous he was of you?--Right!--right!--he has
penetration!--Stay, stay! you don’t know Marmaduke yet--don’t know half
his schemes. How his brow clouded when we were talking of the election!
I must hint to you, he has been sounding me upon that matter; he has a
great mind to stand for this county--talks of starting at the first day
of the poll. I told him it could not do, as I was engaged to you. He
answered, that of course was only a conditional promise, in case none of
my own relations stood. I fought shy, and he pressed confoundedly.--Gad!
he would put me in a very awkward predicament, if he was really to
stand! for you know what the world would say, if they saw me opposing
my own nephew, a rising young man, and not for a relation either; and
Marmaduke Lidhurst is just your deep fellow to plan such a thing
and execute it, not caring at what or whose expense. I can tell him,
however, I am not a man to be bullied out of my interest, or to be
outwitted either.--Stand firm, Vivian, my good friend, and I’ll stand
by you; depend on me!--I only wish----” Here his lordship paused. “But
I cannot say more to you now; for here is my precious heir-at-law coming
to break up the confederacy. I’ll ride over and see you to-morrow;--now,
let us all be mute before Marmaduke, our master politician, as becomes
us--Hey! Vivian? Hey?”

Notwithstanding this sort of jealousy of Marmaduke, and the bravadoing
style in which Lord Glistonbury spoke of him, he spoke to him in a very
different manner: it was apparent to Vivian that his lordship was
under some awe of his nephew, and that, whilst he cherished this secret
dislike, he dreaded coming to any open rupture with a man who was, as
his lordship apprehended, so well able to make his own party good in the
world. When Marmaduke did emerge from that depth of thought in which he
generally seemed to be sunk, and when he did condescend to converse,
or rather to speak, his theme was always of persons in power, or his
sarcasms against those who never would obtain it; from any one thing he
asserted, it could never be proved, but, from all he said, it might
be inferred, that he valued human qualities and talents merely as they
could, or could not, obtain a price in the political market. The power
of speaking in public, as it is a means in England of acquiring all
other species of power, he deemed the first of Heaven’s gifts; and
successful parliamentary speakers were the only persons of whom he
expressed admiration. As Vivian had spoken, and had been listened to
in the House of Commons, he was in this respect an object of Marmaduke
Lidhurst’s envy; but this envy was mitigated by contempt for our hero’s
want of perseverance in ambition.

“There is that Mr. Vivian of yours,” said he to his uncle, whilst Vivian
was gone to talk to the ladies--“you’ll find he will be but a woman’s
man, after all!--Heavens! with his fluency in public, what I would
have done by this time of day! This poor fellow has no consistency of
ambition--no great views--no reach of mind. Put him in for a borough,
and he would be just as well content as if he carried the county. You’ll
see he will, after another session or two, cut out, and retire without a
pension, and settle down into a mere honest country gentleman. He would
be no connexion to increase the consequence of your family. Lady Sarah
Lidhurst would be quite lost with such a nobody! Her ladyship, I am
convinced, has too much discrimination, and values herself too highly,
to make such a _missy_ match.”

Lord Glistonbury coughed, and cleared his throat, and blew his nose,
and seemed to suffer extremely, but chiefly under the repression of his
usual loquacity. Nothing could be at once a greater proof of his respect
for his nephew’s abilities, and of his lordship’s dislike to him, than
this unnatural silence. Mr. Lidhurst’s compliments on Lady Sarah’s
discrimination seemed, however, to be premature, and unmerited; for,
during the course of this day, she treated all the vast efforts of her
cousin Marmaduke’s gallantry with haughty neglect, and showed, what
she had never before suffered to be visible in her manner, a marked
preference for Mr. Vivian’s conversation. The sort of emulation which
Mr. Lidhurst’s rivalship produced increased the value of the object;
she, for whom there was a contention, immediately became a prize. Vivian
was both provoked and amused by the alternate contempt and jealousy
which Mr. Lidhurst betrayed; this gentleman’s desire to keep him out
of the Glistonbury family, and to supplant him in Lady Sarah’s favour,
piqued him to prove his influence, and determined him to maintain
his ground. Insensibly, Vivian’s attentions to the lady became more
vivacious; and he was vain of showing the ease, taste, and elegance of
his gallantry; and he was flattered by the idea, that all the spectators
perceived both its superiority and its success. Lady Sarah, whose
manners had much improved since the departure of Miss Strictland, was
so much embellished by our hero’s attentions, that he thought her quite
charming. He had been prepared to expect fire under the ice, but he was
agreeably surprised by this sudden spring of flowers from beneath the
snow. The carriage was at the door in the evening, and had waited half
an hour, before he was aware that it was time to depart.

“You are right, my dear son!” Lady Mary began, the r moment they were
seated in the carriage; “you are quite right, and I was quite wrong,
about Lady Sarah Lidhurst: she has feeling, indeed--strong, generous
feeling--and she shows it at the proper time: a fine, decided character!
Her manners, to-day, so easy, and her countenance so animated, really
she looked quite handsome, and I think her a charming woman.--What
changes love can make!--Well, now I am satisfied: this is what I always
wished--connexion, family, fortune, every thing; and the very sort of
character you require in a wife,--the very person, of all others, that
is suited to you!”

“If she were but a little more like her sister--or Selina Sidney
_even!_” said Vivian, with a sigh.

“That very word _even_--your saying like Selina Sidney _even_--shows
that you have not much cause for sighing: for you see how quickly
the mere fancy in these matters changes--and you may love Lady Sarah
presently, as much as you loved _even_ Lady Julia.”

“Impossible! ma’am.”

“Impossible! Why, my dear Charles, you astonish me! for you cannot but
see the views and expectations of all the family, and of the young lady
herself; and your attentions to-day were such as could bear but one
construction.”

“Were they, ma’am? I was not aware of that at the time--that is, I did
not mean to engage myself--Good Heavens! surely I am not engaged?--You
know a man is not bound, like a woman, by a few foolish words;
compliments and gallantry are not such serious things with us men. Men
never consider themselves engaged to a woman till they make an absolute
proposal.”

“I know that is a common maxim with young men of the present day, but I
consider it as dishonourable and base; and very sorry should I be to see
it adopted by my son!” cried Lady Mary indignantly. “Ask your friend
Mr. Russell’s opinion on this point: he long ago told you--I know he
did--that if you had not serious thoughts of Lady Sarah Lidhurst, you
would do very wrong, after all the reports that have gone abroad, to
continue your intimacy with the Glistonburys, and thus to deceive her
and her whole family--I only appeal to Mr. Russell;--will you ask your
friend Russell’s opinion?”

Vivian sighed again deeply for the loss of his friend Russell; but as he
could not, without touching upon Lady Julia’s affairs, explain the cause
of the coolness between him and his friend, he answered only, “that an
appeal to Mr. Russell was unnecessary when he had his mother’s opinion.”
 Lady Mary’s wish for the Glistonbury _connexion_ fortified her morality
at this moment, and she replied, “Then my decided opinion is, that
it would be an immoral and dishonourable action to break such a tacit
engagement as this, which you have voluntarily contracted, and which you
absolutely could not break without destroying the peace and happiness of
a whole family. Even that cold Lady Glistonbury grew quite warm to-day;
and you must see the cause.--And in Lady Glistonbury’s state of health,
who could answer for the consequences of any disappointment about her
favourite daughter, just after the loss of her son, too?”

“No more, mother, for Heaven’s sake! I see it all--I feel it all--I must
marry Lady Sarah, then.--By what fatality am I doomed, am I forced
to marry a woman whom I cannot love, whose person and manners are
peculiarly disagreeable to me, and when I’m half in love with another
woman!”

“That would be a shocking thing, indeed,” said Lady Mary, retracting,
and alarmed; for now another train of associations was wakened, and she
judged not by her worldly, but by her romantic system.--“I am sure I
would not, upon any account, urge you to act against your feelings. I
would not be responsible for such a marriage, if you are really in love
with her sister, and if Lady Sarah’s person and manners are peculiarly
and absolutely disagreeable to you. I should do a very wicked
action--should destroy my son’s happiness and morals, perhaps, by
insisting on such a marriage--Heaven forbid!” (A silence of a mile and
a half long ensued.) “But, Charles, after all I saw to-day, how can I
believe that Lady Sarah is so disagreeable to you?”

“Ma’am, she happened not to be absolutely disagreeable to me to-day.”

“Oh! well! then she may not happen to be disagreeable to you to-morrow,
or the next day, or ever again!--And, as to the fancy for her sister,
when all hope is over, you know love soon dies of itself.”

'May be so; but it is not dead yet, ma'am.----I am afraid----And yet I wish
it was--for it can only be a torment to me.--And I am as well
convinced, as you are, that it would be better for me to marry Lady
Sarah--she is certainly very estimable and _all that_; and I am very grateful
for the preference.--And, now she is such a great heiress, she certainly
shows generosity and constancy, in abiding by this preference.--As you say,
she has a noble mind.--And such a woman ought not to be thrown away
upon that Marmaduke Lidhurst, who only looks upon her as a means of
gratifying his ambition; and who, I am sure, would make her very unhappy.----
His cold pride is insupportable to me; he thinks he can make the whole
family cast me off to please him.----Perhaps he may find himself
mistaken.--Lord Glistonbury would prefer me for a son-in-law.--But,
you know, after all, I can propose for lady Sarah at any time--there's
no immediate hurry ma'am.'

So ended the conversation.--The next morning, at an unusual hour, Lord
Glistonbury made his appearance at Castle Vivian, with an air of great
vexation and embarrassment: he endeavoured to speak of trivial topics;
but, one after another, these subjects dropped. Then Lady Mary, who saw
that he was anxious to speak to her son, soon took occasion to withdraw,
not without feeling some curiosity, and forming many conjectures, as to
the object his lordship might have in view in this conference.

Lord Glistonbury’s countenance exhibited, in quick alternation, a look
of absolute determination and of utter indecision. At length, with
abrupt effort, he said, “Vivian, have you seen the papers to-day?”

“The newspapers?--yes!--no!--They are on the table--I did not look at
them--Is there any thing extraordinary?”

“Yes, faith!--extraordinary, very extraordinary!--But it is not here--it
is not there--this is not the right paper--it is not in your paper.
That’s extraordinary, too”--(then feeling in both pockets)--“I was a
fool not to bring it with me--May be I have it--Yes, here it is!--Not
public news, but private.”

Vivian was all expectation, for he imagined that something about Lady
Julia was coming. Lord Glistonbury, who, in his commerce with public
men, had learned the art of paying in words, to gain time when in danger
of a bankruptcy of ideas, went on, stringing sentences together, without
much meaning, whilst he was collecting his thoughts and studying the
countenance of his auditor.

“You recollect my suggestions the last time I had the honour of speaking
to you on a particular subject. I confess, Mr. Lidhurst’s conduct does
not meet my ideas of propriety; but other persons are free to form what
judgment they think fit upon the occasion. I shall submit the matter to
you, Mr. Vivian, feeling myself called upon to come forward immediately
to explain it to your satisfaction; and I do not fear to commit myself,
by stating at once my sentiments, and the light in which it strikes me;
for there must be some decision shown, somehow or other, and on some
side or other.----Decision is all in all in public business, as
the great Bacon or somebody says--and nobody knows that better than
Marmaduke.”

Here his lordship grew warm, and quitting his parliamentary cant,
assumed his familiar style.

“Gad! he has stolen a march upon us--out-generalled us--but, in
my private opinion, not in the handsomest style possible--Hey,
Vivian?--Hey?”

“My dear lord, I have not heard the fact yet,” said Vivian.

“Oh! the fact is simply--Look here, he has without my encouragement
or concurrence--and, indeed, as he very well knew, contrary to my
approbation and wishes--gone, and declared himself candidate for this
county; and here’s his fine flourishing, patriotic, damned advertisement
in the paper--‘To the gentlemen, clergy, and freeholders of the
county.’----Gad! how it startled me this morning! When I first saw it
I rubbed my eyes, and could hardly believe it was Marmaduke. Though I
pique myself on knowing a man’s style at the first line, yet I could not
have believed it was his, unless I had seen his name at full
length in these great abominable characters--‘John Marmaduke
Lidhurst.’--‘Glastonbury Castle!’ too--as if I had countenanced the
thing, or had promised my support; when he knew, that but yesterday I
was arguing the point with him in my study, and told him I was engaged
to you. Such an ungentlemanlike trick!--for you know it reduces me
to the dilemma of supporting a man who is only my friend, against my
nearest relation by blood, which, of course, would have an odd and
awkward appearance in the eyes of the world!”

Vivian expressed much concern for his lordship’s difficulties; but
observed that the world would be very unjust if it blamed him, and he
was sure his lordship had too much decision of character.

“But, independently of the world,” interrupted his lordship, “even in
our own family, amongst all the Lidhursts and their remotest connexions,
there would be quite a league formed against me; and these family
quarrels are ugly affairs; for though our feudal times are done away,
party clanships have succeeded to feudal clanships; and we chiefs of
parties must keep our followers in good humour, or we are nothing in
the _field_--I should say _in the house_--Ha! ha! ha!----I laugh, but it
is a very serious business; for Marmaduke Lidhurst would be, in private
or public, an impracticable enemy. Marmaduke’s a fellow capable of
inextinguishable hatred; and he is everywhere, and knows every body,
of all the clubs, a rising young man, who is listened to, and who would
make his story credited. And then, with one’s nephew, one can’t settle
these things in _an honourable way_--these family quarrels must be
arranged amicably, not honourably; and that’s the difficulty: the laws
of honour are dead letters in these cases, and the laws of the land do
not reach these niceties of feeling.----But of the most important fact
you are still to be apprised.”

“Indeed!” cried Vivian.

“Yes, you have not yet heard Marmaduke’s master-stroke of policy!”

“No!--What is it, my lord?--I am all attention--pray explain it to me.”

“But there’s the delicacy--there’s the difficulty!--No, no, no.--Upon
my soul, I cannot name it!” cried Lord Glistonbury. “It revolts my
feelings--all my feelings--as a man, as a gentleman, as a father. Upon
my honour, as a peer, I would speak if I could; but, for the soul of me,
I cannot.”

“You know, my dear lord,” said Vivian, “there can be no delicacies
or difficulties with me; your lordship has done me the honour to live
always on such a footing of intimacy with me, that surely there is not
any thing you cannot say to me!”

“Why, that’s true,” said Lord Glistonbury, quitting his affected air
of distress, and endeavouring to throw off his real feeling of
embarrassment: “you are right, my dear Vivian! we are certainly upon
terms of such intimacy, that I ought not to be so scrupulous. But there
are certain things, a well-born, well-bred man--in short, it would look
so like--But, in fact, I am driven to the wall, and I must defend myself
as well as I can against this nephew of mine--I know it will look
like the most horrible thing upon earth, like what I would rather be
decapitated than do--I know it will look, absolutely, as if I came
here to ask you to marry my daughter,--which, you know, is a thing no
gentleman could have the most remotely in his contemplation; but, since
I am so pressed, I must tell you the exact truth, and explain to you,
however difficult, Marmaduke’s master-stroke----he has proposed for Lady
Sarah; and has had the assurance to ask me whether there is or is not
any truth in certain reports which he is pleased to affirm have gone
abroad--Heaven knows how or why!----And he urges me--the deep dog! for
his cousin’s sake, to contradict those reports, in the only effectual
manner, by a temporary cessation of the intimate intercourse between
Castle Vivian and Glistonbury Castle, whilst Lady Sarah remains
unmarried; or, if our master politician would speak plainly, till he has
married her himself.----At any rate, I have spoken frankly, Vivian, hey?
you’ll allow; and I am entitled both to a candid interpretation of my
motives, and to equal frankness of reply.”

Whilst his lordship had been speaking, compassion, gratitude, vanity,
rivalship, honour, Lady Mary Vivian’s conversation, Lady Julia’s letter,
then again the _connexion_, the earldom in future, the present triumph
or disappointment about the election, the insolent intrusion of Mr.
Lidhurst, the cruelty of abandoning a lady who was in love with him, the
dishonour, the impossibility of receding after _certain reports_; all
these ideas, in rapid succession, pressed on Vivian’s mind: and his
decision was in consequence of the feelings and of the embarrassment of
the moment. His reply to Lord Glistonbury was a proposal for Lady Sarah,
followed by as many gallant protestations as his presence of mind
could furnish. He did not very well know what he said, nor did Lord
Glistonbury scrupulously examine whether he had the air and accent of
a true lover, nor did his lordship inquire what had become of Vivian’s
late love for Lady Julia; but, quite content that the object should be
altered, the desire the same, he relieved Vivian by exclaiming, “Come,
come, all this sort of thing Lady Sarah herself must hear; and I’ve
a notion--but I can keep a secret. You’ll return with me directly to
Glistonbury. Lady Glistonbury will be delighted to see you; and I shall
be delighted to see Marmaduke’s face, when I tell him you have actually
proposed for Sarah--for now I must tell you all. Our politician
calculated upon the probability that you would not decide, you see,
to make a proposal at once, that would justify me to the world in
supporting my son-in-law against my nephew. As to the choice of the
son-in-law, Sarah settles that part of the business herself, you know;
for, when two proposals are made, both almost equally advantageous, in
the common acceptation of the word, I am too good a father not to
leave the decision to my daughter. So you see we understand one another
perfectly, and will make Marmaduke, too, understand us perfectly,
contrary to his calculations, hey, hey?----Mr. Politician, your
advertisement must be withdrawn, I opine, in the next paper--hey,
Vivian? my dear Vivian!”

With similar loquacity, Lord Glistonbury continued, in the fulness of
his heart, all the way they went together to Glistonbury Castle; which
was agreeable to Vivian, at least by saving him from all necessity of
speaking.

“So!” said Vivian to himself, “the die is cast, and I have actually
proposed for Lady Sarah Lidhurst!--Who would have expected this two
years ago?--I would not have believed it, if it had been foretold to
me even two months ago. But it is a very--a very suitable match, and
it will please the friends of both parties; and Lady Sarah is certainly
very estimable, and capable of very strong attachment; and I like her,
that is, I liked her yesterday very much--I really like her.”

Upon those mixed motives, between convenience and affection, from which,
Dr. Johnson says, most people marry, our hero commenced his courtship of
the Lady Sarah Lidhurst. As the minds of both parties on the subject are
pretty well known to our readers, it would be cruel to fatigue them
with a protracted description of the formalities of courtship. It is
sufficient to say, that my Lord Glistonbury had the satisfaction of
seeing his nephew disappointed; that poor lady Glistonbury had another
stroke of the palsy from joy; and that the marriage of Charles Vivian,
esq., to the lady Sarah Lidhurst, was solemnized with much pomp and
magnificence, and with every demonstration of joy.




CHAPTER XIV.


“And the marriage was solemnized with much pomp and magnificence, and
every demonstration of joy.”

Novelists and novel readers are usually satisfied when they arrive
at this happy catastrophe; their interest and curiosity seldom go any
farther: but, in real life, marriage is but the beginning of domestic
happiness or misery.

Soon after the celebration of Vivian’s nuptials, an event happened which
interrupted all the festivities at Glistonbury, and which changed the
bridal pomp to mourning. Lady Glistonbury, who had been much fatigued by
the multitude of wedding-visits she was obliged to receive and return,
had another stroke of the palsy, which, in a few hours, terminated
fatally. Thus, the very event which Vivian had dreaded, as the probable
consequence of his refusal to marry her daughter, was, in fact,
accelerated by the full accomplishment of her wishes. After the loss
of her mother, Lady Sarah Vivian’s whole soul seemed to be engrossed by
fondness for her husband. In public, and to all eyes but Vivian’s, her
ladyship seemed much the same person as formerly: but, in private, the
affection she expressed for him was so great, that he frequently asked
himself whether this could be the same woman, who, to the rest of
the world, and in every other part of her life, appeared so cold and
inanimate. On a very few occasions her character, before her marriage,
had, “when much enforced, given out a hasty spark, and straight was
cold again;” but now she permitted the steady flame to burn without
restraint. Duty and passion had now the same object. Before marriage,
her attachment had been suppressed, even at the hazard of her life; she
had no idea that the private demonstrations of unbounded love from a
married woman to her husband could be either blameable or dangerous: she
believed it to be her duty to love her husband as much as she possibly
could.--Was not he her husband?--In fact, she knew less of the prudence
necessary to the passion of love, than any girl of seventeen, accustomed
to read novels, and to hear the subject talked of, could readily believe
to be possible. She had been taught that she should
neither read, speak, nor think of love; and she had been so far too much
restricted on this subject, that, absolutely ignorant and unconscious
even of her danger, she now pursued her own course without chart or
compass. Her injudicious tenderness soon imposed such restraint upon
her husband, as scarcely any lover, much less any husband, could have
patiently endured. She would hardly ever suffer him to leave her.
Whenever he went out of the house, she exacted from him a promise that
he would _be back again_ at a certain hour; and if he were even a
few minutes later than his appointment, he had to sustain her fond
reproaches. Even though he stayed at home all day, she was uneasy if
he quitted the room where she sat; and he, who by this time understood,
through all her exterior calmness, the symptoms of her internal
agitation, saw by her countenance that she was wretched if he seemed
interested in the conversation of any other person, especially of any
other woman.

One day when Vivian, after spending the morning _tête-à-tête_ with Lady
Sarah, signified to her his intention of dining abroad, she repeated her
fond request that he would be sure to come home early, and that he would
tell her at what o’clock exactly she might expect to see him again. He
named an hour at hazard, to free himself from her importunate anxiety;
but he could not help saying, “Pshaw!” as he ran down stairs; an
exclamation which fortunately reached only the ears of a groom, who was
thinking of nothing but the tops of his own boots. Vivian happened to
meet some agreeable people where he dined: he was much pressed to stay
to supper; he yielded to entreaty, but he had the good-natured attention
to send home his servant, to beg that Lady Sarah and his mother would
not sit up for him. When he returned, he found all the family in bed
except Lady Sarah, who was sitting up waiting for him, with her watch
in her hand. The moment he appeared, she assailed him with tender
reproaches, to which he answered, “But why would you sit up when I
begged you would not, my dear Lady Sarah?”

She replied by a continuity of fond reproach; and among other things she
said, but without believing it to be true, “Ah! I am sure you would have
been happier if you had married my sister Julia, or _that_ Miss Sidney!”

Vivian sighed deeply; but the next instant, conscious that he had
sighed, and afraid of giving his wife pain, he endeavoured to turn the
course of her thoughts to some other subject. In vain. Poor Lady Sarah
said no more, but felt this exquisitely, and with permanent anguish.
Thus her imprudence reverted upon herself, and she suffered
in proportion to her pride and to her fondness. By such slight
circumstances is the human heart alienated from love! Struggling to
be free, the restive little deity ruffles and impairs his plumage, and
seldom recovers a disposition to tranquillity. Vivian’s good-nature had
induced him for some time to submit to restraint; but if, instead of
weakly yielding to the fond importunity of his wife--if, instead of
tolerating the insipidity of her conversation and the narrowness of
her views, he had with real energy employed her capacity upon suitable
objects, he might have made her attachment the solace of his life.
Whoever possesses the heart of a woman, who has common powers of
intellect, may improve her understanding in twelve months more than
could all the masters, and lectures, and courses of philosophy, and
abridgments, and _documenting_ in the universe. But Vivian had not
sufficient resolution for such an undertaking: he thought only of
avoiding to give or to feel present pain; and the consequences were,
that the evils he dreaded every day increased.

Vivian’s mother saw the progress of conjugal discontent with anguish and
remorse.

“Alas!” said she to herself, “I was much to blame for pressing this
match. My son told me he could never love Lady Sarah Lidhurst. It would
have been better far to have broken off a marriage at the church-door
than to have forced the completion of such an ill-assorted union.
My poor son married chiefly from a principle of honour; his duty and
respect for my opinion had also great weight in his decision; and I have
sacrificed his happiness to my desire that he should make what the world
calls a splendid alliance. I am the cause of all his misery; and Heaven
only knows where all this will end!”

In her paroxysm of self-reproach, and her eagerness to _set things to
rights_ between her daughter-in-law and her son, she only made matters
worse. She spoke with all the warmth and frankness of her own character
to Lady Sarah, beseeching her to speak with equal openness, and to
explain the cause of the _alteration_ in Vivian.

“I do not know what you mean, madam, by alteration in Mr. Vivian!”

“Is not there some disagreement between you, my dear?”

“There is no disagreement whatever, madam, as far as I know, between Mr.
Vivian and me--we agree perfectly,” said Lady Sarah.

“Well, the _misunderstanding_!”

“I do not know of any _misunderstanding_, madam. Mr. Vivian and I
understand one another perfectly.”

“The _coolness_, then--Oh! what word shall I use!--Surely, my dear Lady
Sarah, there is some _coolness_--something wrong?”

“I am sure, madam, I do not complain of any coolness on Mr. Vivian’s
part. Am I to understand that he complains to your ladyship of any thing
wrong on mine? If he does, I shall think it my duty, when he points out
the particulars, to make any alteration he may desire in my conduct and
manners.”

“Complain!--My son!--He makes no _complaints_, my dear. You
misunderstand me. My son does not complain that any thing is wrong on
your part.”

“Then, madam, if no complaints are made on either side, all is as it
should be, I presume, at present; and if in future I should fail in any
point of duty, I shall hold myself obliged to your ladyship if you will
then act as my monitor.”

Hopeless of penetrating Lady Sarah’s sevenfold fence of pride, the
mother flew to her son, to try what could be done with his open and
generous mind. He expressed a most earnest and sincere wish to make
his wife happy. Conscious that he had given her exquisite pain, he
endeavoured to make atonement by the sacrifices which he thought
would be most grateful to her. He refrained often from company and
conversation that was agreeable to him, and would resign himself for
hours to her society. It was fortunate for Lady Julia Lidhurst that,
by continuing with her good uncle the bishop, she did not see the
consequences of the union which she had so strenuously advised. The
advice of friends is often highly useful to prevent an imprudent match;
but it seldom happens that marriages turn out happily which have been
made from the opinion of others rather than from the judgment and
inclinations of the parties concerned; for, let the general reasons
on which the advice is grounded be ever so sensible, it is scarcely
possible that the adviser can take in all the little circumstances
of taste and temper, upon which so much of the happiness or misery of
domestic life depends. Besides, people are much more apt to repent of
having been guided by the judgment of another than of having followed
their own; and this is most likely to be the case with the weakest
minds. Strong minds can decide for themselves, not by the opinions but
by the reasons that are laid before them: weak minds are influenced
merely by opinions; and never, either before or after their decision,
are firm in abiding by the preponderating reasons. However ingenious
or just the arguments, which lady Julia had urged, to prove, that her
sister's firmness of character would compensate for the unsteadiness
of Vivian's--that two people, likely to be mutually serviceable, must,
therefore, become mutally fond of each other--yet there were many
considerations, whcih had escaped her foresight, and which prevented
the accomplishment of her predictions. Even where she had been right,
in some respects, in her knowledge of character, she was wrong in
the conclusions, that she drew from them; for, though she had
foretold, that her sister Sarah woudl love with a warmth, little to
be expected from her general manners, yet, lady Julia was mistaken in
imagining, that this fondness would necessarily be agreeable to Vivian,
nor could she foresee, that it would be so imprudently managed.

No letters, no intelligence from home, except a malicious hint now
and then from her cousin Marmaduke, which she did not credit, gave her
reason to suspect that the pair whom she had contributed to unite were
not perfectly happy. So Lady Julia exulted in the success of her past
counsels, and indulged her generous romantic disposition in schemes for
forwarding a union between Russell and Selina, determining to divide her
fortune amongst the children of her friends. She concluded one of her
letters to Lady Sarah Vivian about this time with these words:--


“Could I but see _one other person_,--whom I must not name, rewarded for
his virtues, as you are, by happy love, I should die content, and would
write on my tomb:--

     ‘Je ne fus point heureux, mais j’ai fait leur bonheur.” [2]

Far removed from all romance and all generosity of sentiment, Lord
Glistonbury, in the mean time, went on very comfortably, without
observing any thing that passed in his family. Whatever uneasiness
obtruded upon his attention he attributed to one cause, anxiety relative
to the question on which his present thoughts were exclusively fixed,
viz. whether Lady Sarah’s first child would be a boy or a girl. “Heaven
grant a boy!” said his lordship; “for then, you know, there’s an end
of Marmaduke as heir-at-law!” Whenever his lordship saw a cloud on the
brows of Lady Mary, of Lady Sarah, or of Vivian, he had one infallible
charm for dispelling melancholy;--he stepped up close to the patient,
and whispered, “It will be a boy!--My life upon it, it will be a boy!”
 Sometimes it happened that this universal remedy, applied at random,
made the patient start or smile; and then his lordship never failed to
add, with a nod of great sagacity, “Ah! you didn’t know I knew what you
were thinking of!--Well! well! you’ll see we shall cut out Marmaduke
yet.”

With this hope of cutting out Marmaduke, Lord Glistonbury went on very
happily, and every day grew fonder of the son-in-law, who was the enemy
of his heir-at-law, or whom he considered as such. The easiness of
Vivian’s temper was peculiarly agreeable to his lordship, who enjoyed
the daily pleasure of governing a man of talents which were far superior
to his own. This easiness of temper in our hero was much increased by
the want of motive and stimulus. He thought that he had now lost his
chance of happiness; he cared little for the more or less pain of
each succeeding day; and so passive was his listlessness, that to
a superficial observer, like Lord Glistonbury, it looked like the
good-nature of perfect content. His lordship had always been in the habit
of indulging in what are called convivial pleasures; and as he had long
since found out, even at the first election, in which he assisted our
hero, that Vivian could be _a good companion_, he did not fail now
to press him frequently _into the service_: Vivian, in the artificial spirits
raised by wine, found some temporary relief to his unhappiness, and
indulged more and more in a vice, which he had formerly detested, and to
which he had never been naturally disposed. The remonstrances of his mother
and of his wife were unavailing. He reproached himself, he felt his degradation;
but his own reproaches were too feeble, and he had lost that friend,
whose eloquence used to animate him to exertion, and to inspire
him with confidence.--Poor Vivian!--In this wreck of his
happiness, one saving chance, however, yet remained. He had still a
public character; he was conscious of, having preserved unblemished
integrity as a member of the senate; and this integrity, still more than
his oratorical talents, raised him far above most of his competitors,
and preserved him not only in the opinion of others, but in his own.
When parliament met, he went to town, took a very handsome house for
Lady Sarah, determining to do all he could to oblige and please the
wife whom he could not love. Lady Sarah had complete power, at home
and abroad, of her time and her expenses: her dress, her equipages,
her servants, her whole establishment, were above Vivian’s fortune, and
equal to her ladyship’s birth and rank. She was mistress of every thing
but of his heart. The less he liked her, the more he endeavoured to
compensate for this involuntary fault, by allowing her that absolute
dominion, and that external splendour, which he thought would gratify,
and perhaps fill her mind. As for himself, he took refuge in the House
of Commons. There he forgot for a time domestic uneasiness, and was
truly animated by what so many affect--zeal for the good of his country.
He was proud to recollect, that the profligate Wharton had failed in
the attempt to laugh him out of his public virtue; he was proud that
Wharton’s prophecies of his apostasy had never been accomplished; that,
as a public! character at least, he had fulfilled the promise of his
early youth, and was still worthy of himself, and of that friend whom he
had lost. He clung to this idea, as to the only hope left him in life. 
Lord Glistonbury could not, in the least, understand or enter into
his notions about public virtue; looked upon them all as mere remains
of school themes and college reading, of which he wondered that Vivian
had not got rid of by this time, and of which he was persuaded that a
little more knowledge of the world would soon obliterate every trace.
His lordship, however, was rather pleased by this patriotism in his
son-in-law, not only because it gave him a sense of his own superiority
over this _fresh man_ of a senator, but because it also forwarded his
political views. Patriotism was to be his cry, his watchword, as one
of the leaders of opposition; and any one who could even _act_ the
character of a patriot plausibly, was of value to his party; how much
more valuable, then, the honest orator, who, being really in earnest,
could surpass the mere political actor in the power of touching and
governing the public mind! Lord Glistonbury one day remarked, in comparing
Vivian's speaking and Marmaduke Lidhurst's, 'They both seem to speak
equally well--equally good argument--equally good language; but there
is a raciness, in my son-in-law's eloquence, which there is not in my
nephew's--They make a very different impression on the house, and I
really do not well know why, except that Lidhurst is considered only as--
as--as one of us.'

Mr. Marmaduke Lidhurst now acted along with his uncle, and joined his
party in politics, upon condition, that his lordship should, on the first
occasion, procure for him a certain lucrative office, on which his mind
was fixed. In this hope, he gave up or affected to relinquish, all view
to his uncle's estate; he often said he hoped lady Sarah's child would
be a boy, and he should not envy Vivian his good fortune; but, in spite
of his dissimulation, he never could conquer his uncle's jealousy, or
Vivian's dislike to the cold selfishness and political craft of his
character. Vivian, however, saw and estimated his abilities; and the sort
of rivalship of the talents, which arose between them, was advantageous,
as it stimulated our hero to exertion.

One night, in a debate in the house of commmons on some question of importance, he made an
excellent speech, which was particularly well received by the house,
because it came from one who had an unblemished character. When
Vivian went into the coffee-room to refresh himself, after he had done
speaking, several of his acquaintance crowded round him, complimenting
him upon his success--he broke from them all! for he saw, advancing
towards him with a smile of approbation, the friend on whose approbation
he set a higher value than he did even on the applauses of the
house--the friend whose lost affection he had so long and so bitterly
regretted. Russell stretched out his hand--Vivian eagerly seized
it; and, before they had either of them spoken one word, they both
understood each other perfectly, and their reconciliation was completely
effected.

“Yes,” said Russell, as they walked out arm in arm together, “yes, it
is fit that I should forget all private resentment, in the pride and
pleasure I feel, not merely in your public success, but in your public
virtue. Talents, even the rare talent of oratory, you know, I hold
cheap in comparison with that which is so far more rare, as well as more
valuable--political integrity. The abhorrence and contempt of political
profligacy, which you have just expressed, as a member of the senate,
and the consistent conduct by which you have supported your principles,
are worthy of you; and, allow me to say, of your education.”

Vivian felt exalted in his own opinion by such praise, and by these the
warmest expressions he had ever received of Russell’s regard. He forgot
even his domestic uneasiness; and this day, the first for many months he
had spent happily, he passed with his friend. They supped together, and
related mutually all that happened since their parting. Russell told
Vivian that he had lately been agreeably surprised by the gift of a
valuable living from the Bishop of ----, Lady Julia Lidhurst’s uncle;
that the bishop, whom he had till then never seen, had written to him
in the handsomest manner, saying that he knew the obligations his family
owed to Mr. Russell; that it had been the dying request of his nephew,
Lord Lidhurst, that some token of the family esteem and gratitude should
be offered to him, to whom they owed so much; but the bishop added, that
neither family gratitude nor private friendship could have induced him
to bestow church preferments upon any but the person whose character
best entitled him to such a distinction and such a trust.

This letter, as Vivian observed, was well calculated to satisfy
Russell’s conscience and his delicacy. The conversation next turned upon
Lady Julia Lidhurst. Russell was not aware that Vivian knew more of her
attachment to him than what had been discovered the day before he left
Glistonbury; and Vivian could not help admiring the honourable and
delicate manner in which his friend spoke of her, without any air of
mystery, and with the greatest respect. He told Vivian he had heard that
proposals had been lately made to her ladyship by a gentleman of great
talents and of high character; but that she had positively declined his
addresses, and had repeated her declaration that she would never marry.
Her good uncle left her, on this point, entirely at liberty, and did not
mention the proposal to Lord Glistonbury, lest she should be exposed to
any fresh difficulties. Russell expressed much satisfaction at this part
of the bishop’s conduct, as being not only the most kind, but the
most judicious, and the most likely to dispose his niece to change her
determination. He repeated his opinion that, united to a man of sense
and strength of mind, she would make a charming and excellent wife.
Vivian agreed with him; yet observed, that he was convinced she would
never marry--There he paused.--Could Lady Julia herself have overheard
the conversation which afterwards passed between these two gentlemen,
one of whom she had loved and the other of whom she had refused, not a
word would have hurt her feelings: on the contrary, she would have been
raised in her own opinion, and gratified by the strong interest they
both showed for her happiness. They regretted only that a young woman
of such talents, and of such a fine, generous disposition, had been so
injudiciously educated.

“And now, my dear Russell,” cried Vivian, “that we have finished the
chapter of Lady Julia, let us talk of Miss Sidney.”--Russell’s change
of countenance showed that it was not quite so easy for him to talk upon
this subject.--To spare him the effort, Vivian resumed, “As you are a
rich man now, my dear Russell, you will certainly marry; and I know,”
 added he, smiling, “that Miss Sidney will be your wife. If ever man
deserved such a prize, you do; and I shall be the first to wish you
joy.”

“Stay, my good friend,” interrupted Russell; “your kindness for me,
and your imagination, are too quick in this anticipation of my
happiness.”--Russell then told him, that he never had declared his
attachment to Selina till Vivian’s marriage had put an end to all
probability of rivalship with his friend. She had expressed high esteem
for Russell, but had told him, that she had suffered so much from
a first unfortunate attachment, that she felt averse from any new
engagements.

“Shall I assure you, as you assured me just now with regard to Lady
Julia,” said Vivian, “that Miss Sidney will he prevailed upon to alter
her determination; and shall I add, that, though I should like Lady
Julia the less, I should like Selina the better, for changing her
mind?”--He went on, generously expressing sincere hopes, that his friend
might obtain Selina Sidney’s affections, and might enjoy that domestic
happiness, which--Vivian was going to say, which he had himself
forfeited; but checking this regret, he only said--“that domestic
happiness, which I consider as the summit of human felicity, and which
no man can deserve better than you do, my dear Russell.”

Russell easily guessed that poor Vivian had not attained this summit
of human felicity by his own marriage, but never adverted to any of the
conversations they had held about Lady Sarah Lidhurst; never recalled
any of Vivian’s vehement declarations concerning the absolute
impossibility of his making such a match; never evinced the least
surprise at his marriage; nor inquired how he had conquered his passion
for Lady Julia. With friendly forgetfulness, he seemed to have totally
obliterated from his mind all that it could do no good to remember.
Vivian was sensible of this delicacy, and grateful for it; but to
imitate Russell’s reserve and silence upon certain subjects required
a force, a forbearance of which he was not capable. At first he had
determined not to say one word to Russell of domestic uneasiness; but
they had not been many hours together before Vivian poured forth all
his complaints, and confessed how bitterly he repented his marriage: be
declared that he had been persuaded, by the united efforts of her family
and of his mother, against his own judgment, or, at least, against his
taste and inclinations, to marry Lady Sarah.

“By whatever persuasions, or by whatever motives, your choice was
decided,” interrupted Russell, “reflect that it is decided for life;
therefore abide by it, and justify it. Above all, make yourself happy
with the means which are yet in your power, instead of wasting your mind
in unavailing regret. You are united to a woman who has every estimable
quality, as you candidly acknowledge: there are some particulars in
which she does not please your taste; but withdraw your attention from
these, and you will be happy with a wife who is so firmly attached to
you. Consider, besides, that--romance apart--love, though a delightful
passion, is not the only resource which a man of sense, virtue, and
activity may find for happiness. Your public duties, your success, and
your reputation as a public character, will--”

Russell was interrupted in this consolatory and invigorating speech, by
the entrance of a servant of Lord Glistonbury’s, who brought a note from
his lordship to Mr. Vivian, requesting to see him as soon as he could
make it convenient to come to Glistonbury House, as his lordship wanted
to speak to him on particular business of the greatest importance.
Vivian was provoked by being thus summoned away from his friend, to
attend to one of what he called Lord Glistonbury’s _important mysteries
about nothing_. Russell was engaged to go into the country the ensuing
day, to take possession of his new living; but he promised that he would
see him again soon; and, with this hope, the two friends parted.

Vivian went to Lord Glistonbury’s: he found his lordship in his study.
“Where have you been, Vivian?” exclaimed he: “I have sent messenger
after messenger to look for you, half over the town: I thought you were
to have dined with us, but you ran away, and nobody could tell where, or
with whom; and we have been waiting for you at our cabinet council here
with the utmost impatience.”--Vivian answered, that he had unexpectedly
met with his friend Russell; and was proceeding to tell his lordship
how handsomely the Bishop of----had provided for his friend; but Lord
Glistonbury, like many other great men, having the habit of forgetting
all the services of those from whom they have nothing more to expect,
cut short Vivian’s narration, by exclaiming, “True, true! well, well!
that’s all over now--Certainly, _that_ Russell did his duty by my poor
son; and acted as he ought to do--in all things; and I’m glad to hear
my brother has given him a good living; and I hope, as you say, he will
soon be married--so best--so best, you know, Vivian, for reasons of our
own--Well! well! I’m glad he is provided for--not but what that living
would have been of essential service, if it had been reserved for a
friend of mine--but my brother the bishop never can enter into any
political views--might as well not have a brother a bishop--But,
however, Mr. Russell’s a friend of yours--I am not regretting--not so
rude to you to regret----on the contrary, rejoice, particularly as Mr.
Russell is a man of so much merit--But all that’s over now; and I want
to talk to you upon quite another matter. You know I have always said I
should, sooner or later, succeed in my grand object, hey, Vivian?”

“Your lordship’s grand object?--I am not sure that I know it.”

“Oh, surely, you know my grand object. You my son-in-law, and forget my
grand object?--The marquisate, you know; the marquisate, the marquisate!
Did not I always tell you that I would make government, sooner or later,
change my earldom into a marquisate? Well! the thing is done--that is,
as good as done; they have sent to treat with me upon my own terms.”

“I give you joy, my dear lord!” said Vivian.

“Joy!--to be sure you do, my sober sir:--one would think you had no
concern or interest in the business. Joy! to be sure you give me joy;
but, I can tell you, you must give me something more than joy--you must
give me support.”

“How he looks!” continued Lord Glistonbury, “as if he did not know
what is meant by support. Vivian, did you never hear of parliamentary
support?”

“I hope, my dear lord,” replied Vivian, gravely, “that you have not
entered into any engagements, or made any promises for me, which I
cannot have it in my power to perform.”

Lord Glistonbury hesitated in some confusion; and then, forcing a look
of effrontery, in an assured tone, replied, “No. I have not made any
engagements or promises for you which you cannot perform, Vivian, I am
clear; nor any which I have not a right to expect my son-in-law will
confirm with alacrity.”

“What have you engaged?--what have you promised for me, my lord?” said
Vivian, earnestly.

“Only, my dear boy,” said Lord Glistonbury, assuming a facetious tone,
“only that you will be always one of us--And are not you one of us?--my
son-in-law?--the deuce is in it if he is not one of us!--In short, you
know, to be serious, a party must go together, that is, a family party
must go together; and, if a ministry do my business, of course I do
theirs. If I have my marquisate, they have my votes.”

“But not my vote--pardon me, my lord--my vote cannot be bartered in this
manner.”

“But, you know, Mr. Vivian, you know it is for your interest as much as
for mine; for, you know, the marquisate will probably descend, in due
course of time, to your son. So your interest is full as much concerned
as mine; and besides, let me tell you, I have not forgotten your
immediate interest: I have stipulated that you should have the valuable
place which Mr. C---- was to have had.”

All that Russell had said of public virtue was fresh in our hero’s mind.
“I thank you, my dear lord,” said he; “for I am sure this was kindly
intended; but I am not one of those persons, who in public affairs think
only of their private interest--I am not thinking of my interest.”

'So I perceive,' said lord Glistonbury, in a tone of disappointment and
displeasure. Without regarding this, Vivian proceeded--

'Not for a marquisate, not for any title or rank in the gift of the crown,
would I forfeit my honour, my principles, my public character.'

'Very fine, vastly well said; but not quite to the purpose, not precisely
in point, I apprehend!' replied lord Glistonbury; 'for I do not see that a
man's accepting for a marquisate, or voting with his majesty's ministers,
necessarily implies a forfeiture of honour and principle, and a total
dereliction of all public reputation.

'Far from it!' cried Vivian; 'you surely cannot imagine me, my lord, to
be capable of making so wild or absurd an assertion.
But if a man maintains certain public measures one day, and the next, for
_valuable consideration_, supports diametrically opposite opinions
and measures, he will lose, and deserve to lose, all reputation for
integrity.'

“Integrity! political integrity!” said Lord Glistonbury; “fine words,
which mean nothing. Behind the scenes, as we are now, Vivian, what use
can there be in talking in that strain?--Between you and me, you know
this is all nonsense. For who, of any party, now thinks, really and
truly, of any thing but getting power or keeping it? Power, you know,
stands for the measure of talent; and every thing else worth having is
included in that word power. I speak plainly. And as honour is merely
an affair of opinion, and opinion, again, an affair of numbers, and as
there are numbers enough to keep one in countenance in these things;
really, my dear Vivian, it is quite childish, quite boyish, smells of
the lamp. To declaim about political integrity, and all that, is not
the language of a man who knows any thing of business--any thing of the
world.--But why do I say all this?” cried Lord Glistonbury, checking
himself and assuming an air of more reserved displeasure.--“Mr.
Vivian certainly knows all this as well as I do; I know how my nephew
Marmaduke, who, with all his faults, is no fool, would interpret your
present language: he would say, as I have often heard him say, that
political integrity is only a civil _put off_.”

“Political integrity only a civil put off!” repeated Vivian, with
unfeigned astonishment. When he formerly heard similar sentiments from
the avowed profligate and hackneyed politician Mr. Wharton, he was
shocked; but to hear them repeated, as being coolly laid down by so
young a man as Mr. Lidhurst, excited so much disgust and contempt in
Vivian’s mind, that he could hardly refrain from saying more than either
prudence or politeness could justify.

“Now I am free to confess,” pursued Lord Glistonbury, “that I should
think it more candid and manly, and, I will add, more friendly, and more
the natural, open conduct of a son-in-law to a father-in-law, instead of
talking of political integrity, to have said, at once, I cannot oblige
you in this instance.”

“Surely, my lord, you cannot be in earnest?” said Vivian.

“I tell you, sir, I am in earnest,” cried his lordship, turning suddenly
in a rage, as he walked up and down the room; “I say, it would have
been more candid, more manly, more every thing,--and much more like a
son-in-law--much!--much!----I am sure, if I had known as much as I do
now, sir, you never should have been my son-in-law--never! never!--seen
Lady Sarah in her grave first!--I would!--I would!--yes, sir--I
would!----And you are the last person upon earth I should have expected
it from. But I have a nephew--I have a nephew, and now I know the
difference. No man can distinguish his friends till he tries them.”

Vivian in vain endeavoured to appease Lord Glistonbury by assurances
that he would do any thing in his power to oblige him, except what
he himself considered as dishonourable: his lordship reiterated, with
divers passionate ejaculations, that if Vivian would not oblige him in
this point, on which he had set his heart--where the great object of his
life was at stake--he could never believe he had any regard for him; and
that in short, it must come to an open rupture between them, for that
he should never consider him more as his son. Having uttered this
denunciation as distinctly as passion would permit, Lord Glistonbury
retired to rest.

Vivian went immediately to his mother, to tell her what had passed, and
he felt almost secure of her approbation; but though she praised him for
his generous spirit of independence, yet it was evident the hopes that
the title of marquis might descend to a grandson of her own weighed more
with her than any patriotic considerations. She declared, that indeed
she would not, for any title, or any thing upon earth, have her son
act dishonourably; but what was asked of him, as far as she could
understand, was only such a change of party, such compliances, as every
public man in his place would make: and though she would not have him,
like some she could name, a corrupt tool of government, yet, on the
other hand, it was folly to expect that he alone could do any thing
against the general tide of corruption--that it would be madness in
him to sacrifice himself entirely, without the slightest possibility of
doing any good to his country.

Vivian interrupted her, to represent that, if each public man argued
in this manner, nothing could ever be accomplished for the public good:
that, on the contrary, if every man hoped that something might be done,
even by his individual exertion, and if he determined to sacrifice a
portion of his private interest in the attempt, perhaps much might be
effected.

“Very likely!” Lady Mary said. She confessed she knew little of
politics: so from argument she went to persuasion and entreaties. She
conjured him not to quarrel with the Glistonburys, and not to provoke
Lord Glistonbury’s displeasure. “I see all that artful Marmaduke’s
schemes,” said she: “he knows his uncle’s pertinacious temper; and he
hopes that your notions of patriotism will prevent you from yielding on
a point, on which his uncle has set his heart. Marmaduke will know how
to take advantage of all this, believe me!”

The more Vivian resisted, the more eager his mother became; till, at
last, she worked herself up to tears, and declared, that she made it
her own most urgent request, which she would repeat on her knees, if
nothing would move him, to give up his _Quixotism_.

'Quixotism!' said Vivian: 'Russell, my friend and preceptor, would
give my resolution a very different name.'

Lady Mary replied, that she thought her opinion, or, at least, her
entreaties, ought to have more weight with him than those of any
preceptor, or other friend upon Earth. Now that it was a contest
of power and influence, beteween her ladyship and Russell, she grew,
if possible, still more vehement.

Vivian was shaken in his resolution by his mother’s entreaties--by
the idea of all the family quarrels that would ensue, and of all the
difficulties in which he might be involved, if he persisted in his
generous determination. Lady Mary had still powerful arguments in
store.

“My dear son,” resumed she, “it would be absolute madness to refuse
the place that is now offered you: only consider the situation of your
affairs--consider, I beseech you, the distress you will be in by and
by, if you reject this offer--recollect the immense demands upon you;
recollect that heap of bills for the election, and for the buildings,
and all the poor workmen about the castle! and that coachmaker too! and
remember, the purchase money of the house in town must be paid in three
months. It is really impossible that you can go on, unless you accept of
this place; for you know, my dear Charles, I cannot assist you effectually,
or most happy should I be to relieve you from all difficulties, or
whatever hazard or inconvenience. I would willingly give up my house
in town, and lay down my carriage--.'

'No, no, my dear mother!' exclaimed Vivian; 'you shall do no more; you
have already done infintely too much; and I cannot bear to think of the
inconvenience to which your confiding generosity has already put you.'

'Don't think of that--don't speak of that, Charles!--Between mother and
son, you know, there can be no division of interest; and, if I know
anything of myself, I shall always manage so as to prevent your feeling
any uneasiness on my account. When I mentioned myself, I meant not to
allude to the past, but only to regret, that, in future, I have no means
of serving you as I wish; and, as to the Glistonburies, you know,
notwithstanding his great nominal income, he lives beyond it so far,
that there is scarcely a man in England, who would find it more difficult
to raise a thousand pounds than lord Glistonbury. If you disoblige him
now, you have no decent claim upon him; and besides, I cannot bear the
idea of your asking such sort of pecuniary favours from your wife's family.
They are all proud enough, surely, as it is, and sufficiently inclined to
consider their connexion a high honour to us. There is no occasion to abase
ourselves, by becoming their debtors. Indeed, to be in debt at all, or
to any body, is a terrible thing!'

'A terrible thing, indeed!' said Vivian, with a deep sigh.

'And the only possible means by which you can get out of debt, is
by accepting this place, which would put you at ease at once, and enable
you to continue in the style of life to which you have of late been
accustomed.”

“As to that, I could alter my style of life--I would do any thing,”
 cried Vivian, “to pay my debts and preserve my independence. I will
alter my mode of living, and retrench decidedly and vigorously.”

“Well, my dear son, I admire your spirit, and, if you can do this, it
will certainly be best; but I fear that when it comes to the trial, you
will not be able to persevere.”

“I shall--I shall! Believe me, mother, I have resolution enough for
this--you do me injustice,” said Vivian.

“No, my dear Charles, I do you justice; for I do not doubt your
resolution, as far as your own privations are concerned; but, consider
your wife--consider Lady Sarah--consider the luxury in which she
has always been accustomed to live, and the high sphere in which her
relations move! How her pride would be hurt by their looking down
upon her! I have no doubt Lady Sarah would do her duty, and make
any sacrifices for her husband; and if you were--I must now speak
plainly--if you were passionately fond of her--an all-for-love
husband--you could, with honour and propriety, accept of such
sacrifices; but what would retirement be _to_ poor Lady Sarah, and
_with_ Lady Sarah?--with a companion, who has no literature,
and not that _infinite varity_ which----But I am sure I do not
mean to depreciate her in your eyes; she is a very estimable woman;
and I say no more, but leave you to your own reflections on that
subject. If there were any thing absolutely dishonourable in your
accepting this place, I am sure, I would sooner perish, than urge
you to it; but, though I don't understand politics, I know enough of
the world to be certain, that very honourable men take places, without
any disgrace. So let me entreat you, my dear son, to see things
as they really are.”

Vivian told his mother that he would take a night to reconsider the
matter coolly; and, satisfied with having gained so much, she suffered
him to go home. As he was quitting his own dressing-room, he paused,
to consider whether he should consult his wife, who was, as yet, in
ignorance of the whole transaction, and who knew nothing of the deranged
state of his affairs. He did her the justice to believe that she
would be willing to live with him in retirement, and to forego all the
luxuries and pride of her rank, for the sake of her duty and of her
love. He was convinced that, in any opposition between her father’s
interests and her husband’s honour, she would strongly abide by her
husband. Though lady Sarah knew nothing of politics, and though she
had no enlargement of mind, or any ideas of public good, or patriotism,
yet Vivian was well aware, that, if he could lay before her this simple
proposition:--'If I act so and so, I will act contrary to my conscience
and my honour; and, if I act in the opposite manner, I shall do what I
think right, and I shall preserve my honour'--she would say, 'Do what you
think right, and preserve your honour, let what will be the consequence.'
He recollected all Lady Julia had said of the advantage that
her sister’s firmness of mind might be in steadying his vacillating
temper in any moment of trial. Here was the first _great occasion_,
since his marriage, where his wife’s strength of mind could be of
essential service to him: yet he hesitated whether he should avail
himself of this advantage; and every moment, as he approached nearer
to her apartment, he hesitated more and more; He did not, in the first
place, like to humble himself so far as to ask her counsel; then he
had not courage to confess those debts and embarrassments which he
had hitherto concealed. All that his mother had suggested about the
indelicacy of requiring or accepting great sacrifices from a woman whom,
though he esteemed, he could not love--the horror of retirement
with such a companion--the long years _tête-à-tête_--all these ideas
combined, but chiefly the apprehension of the immediate present pain of
speaking to her on a disagreeable subject, and of being obliged to hear
her speak with that formal deliberation which he detested; added to
this, the dread of her surprise, if not of her reproaches, when all his
affairs should be revealed, operated so irresistibly upon his weakness,
that he decided on the common resource--concealment. His hand was upon
the lock of his chamber-door, and he turned it cautiously and softly,
lest, in entering his apartment, he should waken Lady Sarah: but she was
not asleep.

“What can have kept you so late, Mr. Vivian?” said she.

“Business, my dear,” answered he, with some embarrassment.

“May I ask what sort of business?”

“Oh!--only--political business.”

“Political business!” She looked earnestly at her husband; but, as if
repressing her curiosity, she afterwards added, “our sex have nothing
to do with politics,” and, turning away from the light, she composed
herself to sleep.

“Very true, my dear,” replied Vivian--not a word more did he say:
content with this evasion of the difficulty, he thus, by his weakness,
deprived himself of the real advantage of his wife’s strength of mind.
Whilst Lady Sarah, in total ignorance of the distress of her husband,
slept in peace, he lay awake, revolving painful thoughts in the
silence of the night. All that his mother had said about the pecuniary
difficulties to which they must soon be reduced recurred with fresh
force; the ideas of the unpaid election bills, all the masons’,
carpenters’, painters’, glaziers’, and upholsterers’ bills, with
“thousands yet unnamed behind,” rose, in dreadful array, before him,
and the enthusiasm of his patriotism was appalled. With feverish
reiteration, he ran over and over, in his mind, the same circle of
difficulties, continually returning to the question, “_Then what can
be done?_” Bitterly did he this night regret the foolish expenses into
which he had early in life been led. If it were to do over again, he
certainly would not turn his house into a castle; if he had foreseen how
much the expense would surpass the estimates, assuredly nothing could
have tempted him to such extravagance. The architect, the masons, the
workmen, one and all, were knaves; but, one and all, they must be
paid. Then what could he do?--And the debts incurred by the contested
elections!--contested elections are cursed things, when the bills come
to be paid; but, cursed or not, they must be paid. Then what could he
do?--The distress in which he should involve his generous mother--the
sacrifices he should require from his wife--the family quarrels--all
that Lady Sarah would suffer from them--the _situation_ of his wife.
Then what could he do?--He MUST submit to Lord Glistonbury, and take the
place that was offered to him.

Vivian sighed--and turned in his bed--and sighed--and thought--and
turned--and sighed again--and the last sigh of expiring patriotism
escaped him!----To this end, to this miserable end, must all patriotism
come, which is not supported by the seemingly inferior virtues of
prudence and economy.

Poor Vivian endeavoured to comfort himself by the reflection that he
should not act from merely mercenary considerations, but that he
was compelled to yield to the solicitations of his mother and of his
father-in-law; that he was forced to sacrifice his own public opinions
to secure domestic peace, and to prevent the distress of his mother,
the misery, and perhaps danger, of his wife and child. Dereliction of
principle, in these circumstances, was something like an amiable, a
pardonable weakness. And then, see it in what light you will, as Lord
Glistonbury observed, “there are so many who will keep a patriot in
countenance now-a-days, for merely changing sides in politics. A man is
not even thought to be a man of talents till he gets something by his
talents. The bargain he makes--the price he gains--is, in most people’s
estimation, the value of the public man.”

All this Vivian said to himself to quiet his conscience; and all this,
he knew, would be _abundantly satisfactory_ to the generality of people
with whom he associated; therefore, from them he could fear neither
reproach nor contempt: but he could not bear even to think of
Russell--he felt all the pangs of remorse, and agony of shame, as the
idea of such a friend came into his mind. Again he turned in his bed,
and groaned aloud--so loud, that Lady Sarah wakened, and, starting up,
asked what was the matter; but receiving no answer, she imagined that
she had been in a dream, or that her husband had spoken in his sleep.
He groaned no more, nor did he even sigh: but fatigued with thinking and
with feeling, he at last fell into a sort of slumber, which lasted till
it was time to rise. Before Vivian was dressed, Lord Glistonbury called
upon him--he went into his dressing-room. His lordship came with his
best address, and most courteous face of persuasion; he held out his
hand, in a frank and cordial manner, as he entered, begging his dear
son’s pardon for the warmth and want of temper, he was free to confess,
he had shown last night; but he was persuaded, he said, that Vivian knew
his sincere regard for him, and convinced that, in short, they should
never _essentially_ differ: so that he was determined to come to talk
the matter over with him when they were both cool; and that he felt
assured that Vivian, after a night’s reflection, would always act so
as to justify his preference of his son-in-law to his nephew, hey,
Vivian?--Lord Glistonbury paused for an answer--Vivian cut himself as he
was shaving, and was glad of a moment’s reprieve; instead of answering,
he only exclaimed, “Cursed razor! cut myself!--My lord, won’t you sit
down? will you do me the honour to--”

Lord Glistonbury seated himself; and, in regular order, with his
tiresome parade of expletives, went through all the arguments that could
be adduced to prove the expediency of Vivian’s taking this place, and
assisting him, as he had taken it for granted his son-in-law would,
on such an occasion. The letters of the great and little men who had
negotiated the business of the marquisate were then produced, and
an account given of all that had passed _in confidence_; and Lord
Glistonbury finished by saying that the affair was absolutely concluded,
he having passed his word and pledged his honour for Vivian; that he
would not have spoken or acted for him if he had not felt that he was,
when acting for his son-in-law, in fact acting for himself--his second
self; that there had been no time to wait, no possibility of consulting
Vivian; that the whole plan was suggested yesterday, in two hours after
the house broke up, and was arranged in the evening; that search and
inquiries had been made every where for Vivian; but, as he could not be
found, Lord Glistonbury said he had ventured to decide for him, and, as
he hoped, for his interest and for that of the family; and the thing,
now done, could not be undone: his lordship’s word was sacred, and could
not be retracted.

Vivian, in a feeble, irresolute tone, asked if there was no possibility
of his being allowed to decline the place that was offered him, and
suggested that he could take a middle course; to avoid voting against
his lordship’s wishes, he could, and he believed that he would, accept
of the Chiltern Hundreds, and go out of parliament for the session.

Lord Glistonbury remonstrated against what he termed the madness of the
scheme.

“A man like you, my dear Vivian, who have distinguished yourself so
much already in opposition, who will distinguish yourself so much more
hereafter in place and in power----”

“No,” said Vivian, rising as he finished shaving himself; “no, my lord,
I shall never more distinguish myself, if I abandon the principles I
believe to be just and true. What eloquence I have--if I have any--has
arisen from my being in earnest: I shall speak ill--I shall not be able
to speak at all--when I get up against my conscience.”

“Oh!” said Lord Glistonbury, laughing, “your romantic patriotism may be
very nice in its feelings; but, believe me, it will not deprive you of
the use of your speech. Look at every one of the fine orators of our
times, and name me one, if you can, who has not spoken, and spoken
equally well, on both sides of the house; ay, and on both sides of most
political questions. Come, come, you’ll find you will get on quite as
well as they got on before you, hey?”

“You will find that I shall be of no use to you--that I shall be a dead
weight on your hands.”

“You a dead weight! you, who are formed to be--now, really, without
flattery--you know there’s no occasion for flattery between you and
me--to be the soul, and, in time, the head of a party----Stay!--I know
all you are going to say, but give me leave to judge--You know there’s
my own nephew, a very clever young man, no doubt, he is allowed to be;
and yet, you see, I make no comparison between you. I assure you I am a
judge in these matters, and you see the house has confirmed my judgment;
and, what is more--for I can keep nothing from you--if it won’t make you
too vain, and make you set too high a price upon yourself, which will be
very troublesome in the present case; but, I say, be that as it may,
I will frankly own to you, that I believe you have been of essential
service in procuring me this great favourite object of my life, the
marquisate.”

“I, my lord! impossible!--for I never took the slightest step toward
procuring it.”

“Pardon me, you took the most effectual step, without knowing it,
perhaps. You spoke so well in opposition, that you made it the interest
of ministry to _muzzle you_; and there was no way so effectual of
getting at you as through me, I being your father-in-law and you my
heir. You don’t see the secret concatenation of these things with a
glance as I do, who have been used to them so long. And there was no way
of coming to the point with me without the marquisate--that was my _sine
qua non_; and you see I gained my point--by your means, chiefly, I am
free to allow--though Marmaduke would gladly persuade me it was by his
negotiating. But I do you justice; I did you justice, too, in more than
words, when I stipulated for that place for you, which, in fact, I knew
you could not go on much longer without. So, my dear Vivian, all this
explained to our mutual satisfaction, we have nothing more to do but to
shake hands upon it and go down stairs; for I have engaged myself and
Secretary----to breakfast with you, and he has _full powers_, and is to
carry back our _capitulation_--and,” continued Lord Glistonbury, looking
out of the window, “here’s our friend’s carriage.”

“Oh, my lord, it is not yet too late!” cried Vivian; “it may yet be
arranged otherwise. Is there no way--no possibility----”

A loud knock at the house door.

“I wish to Heaven, my lord!----”

“So do I wish to Heaven, with all my soul, that you would finish this
nonsense, my dear Vivian, and come down to breakfast. Come, come,
come!--Hey, hey, hey!--This is absolutely too ridiculous, and I must go,
if you don’t. Only consider a political breakfast of this nature!”

Lord Glistonbury hurried down stairs:--reluctantly, and with a heavy
heart and repugnant conscience, Vivian followed. At this instant, he
wished for Russell, to prevent what he knew would be the consequence of
this interview. But Russell was absent--the keeper of his conscience,
the supporter of his resolution, was not at hand. Woe to him who is not
the keeper of his own conscience--the supporter of his own resolution!
The result of this political breakfast was just what every reader,
who knows the world but half as well as Lord Glistonbury knew it, has
probably long since anticipated. The capitulation of the patriots of
the Glistonbury band, with Vivian at their head, was settled. Lord
Glistonbury lost no character by this transaction, for he had none to
lose--he was quite at his ease, or quite callous. But Vivian bartered,
for a paltry _accommodation_ of his pecuniary difficulties, a reputation
which stood high in the public opinion--which was invaluable in his
own--which was his last stake of happiness. He knew this--he felt it
with all the anguish of exquisite but USELESS sensibility.

Lord Glistonbury and his new friend, Secretary ----, who was a man of
wit as well as a politician, rallied Vivian upon his gravity and upon
his evident depression of spirits.

“Really, my dear Vivian,” cried Lord Glistonbury, “my patience is now
exhausted, and I must not let you expose yourself here, before our
friend, as a novice--Hey! hey!--Why, will you never open your eyes, and
see the world as it is! Why! what!--Did you never read the fable of the
dog and his master’s meat?--Well! it is come to that now in England;
and he is a foolish dog, indeed, who, when he can’t save the meat, won’t
secure his share--hey?”

His lordship and the secretary laughed in concert.

“Look, how Vivian preserves his solemnity!” continued Lord Glistonbury;
“and he really looks as if he was surprised at us. My dear Vivian, it
requires all my knowledge of your _bonne foi_ to believe that you are in
earnest, and not acting the part of a patriot of _older_ times.”

“Oh!” cried the secretary, with a facetious air, “Mr. Vivian assuredly
knows, as well as we do, that--

‘A patriot is a fool in ev’ry age, Whom all lord chamberlains allow the
stage.’

But off the stage we lay aside heroics, or how should we ever get
on?--Did you hear, my lord,” continued the secretary, turning to Lord
Glistonbury, “that there is another blue riband fallen in to us by the
death of Lord G----?”

“I had a great regard for poor Lord G----. Many applications, I suppose,
for the vacant riband?”

From the vacant riband they went on to talk over this man’s pension and
the other man’s job; and considered who was to get such and such a
place when such and such a person should resign or succeed to something
better. Then all the miserable mysteries of ministerial craft were
unveiled to Vivian’s eyes. He had read, he had heard, he had believed,
that public affairs were conducted in this manner; but he had never,
till now, actually seen it: he was really novice enough still to feel
surprise at finding that, after all the fine professions made on all
sides, the main, the only object of these politicians, was to keep their
own, or to get into the places of others. Vivian felt every moment his
disgust and his melancholy increase. “And it is with these people I
have consented to act! And am I to be hurried along by this stream of
corruption to infamy and oblivion! Then Russell--”

Vivian resolved to retract the engagement he had just made with Lord
Glistonbury and the secretary, and he waited only for a pause in their
conversation to explain himself. But, before any pause occurred, more
company came in,--the secretary hurried away, saying to Vivian, who
would have stopped him at the door, “Oh, my dear sir, every thing is
settled now, and you must be with us in the house to-night--and you will
find the whole business will go on as smoothly as possible, if gentlemen
will but act together, and strengthen the hands of government. I beg
pardon for breaking away--but so many people are waiting for me--and any
thing further we can settle when we meet in the house.”

Lord Glistonbury also refused to listen to farther explanations--said
that all was settled, and that it was impossible to make any
recantations.




CHAPTER XV.


The hour of going to the House of Commons at length arrived; Lord
Glistonbury saw that Vivian was so much out of spirits, and in such
confusion of mind, that he began to fear that our hero’s own account
of himself was just, and that he would not be able to command ideas,
or even words, when he was to speak in opposition to what he called his
principles and his conscience. “This son of mine, instead of being our
great Apollo, will be a dead weight on our hands, unless we can contrive
to raise his spirits.”

So, to raise his spirits, Lord Glistonbury accompanied him to the
coffee-room of the house, and insisted upon his taking some refreshment
before he should attempt to speak. His lordship _fortified_ him with
bumper after bumper, till at last Vivian came up to the speaking point.
He took his seat in his new place in the house, and, endeavouring
to brave away the sense of shame, rose to speak. Notwithstanding the
assistance of the wine, and the example of Mr. Marmaduke Lidhurst, who
spoke before him with undaunted assurance, Vivian could scarcely get on
with a hesitating, confused, inconsistent speech, uttered in so low and
indistinct a voice, that the reporters in the gallery complained that
they could not catch this honourable member’s meaning, or that his words
did not reach them. Conscious of his failure, and still more conscious
of its cause, he retired again to the coffee-room as soon as he had
finished speaking, and again Lord Glistonbury plied him with wine,
saying that he would find he would _do very well in reply_ presently.
It happened that Lord Glistonbury was called away--Vivian remained. Mr.
Wharton, with a party of his friends, entered the coffee-room. Wharton
seemed much heated both with wine and anger--he was talking eagerly
to the gentlemen with him, and he pronounced the words, “Infamous
conduct!--Shabby!--Paltry fellow!” so loud, that all the coffee-room
turned to listen. Colonel S----, a gentleman who was one of Wharton’s
party, but who had a good opinion of Vivian, at this moment took him by
the arm, and, drawing him aside, whispered, in confidence, that he was
persuaded there had been some _mistake_ in the arrangements, which, as
it was reported, Lord Glistonbury had just made with the ministry, for
that Mr. Wharton and many of his lordship’s former party, complained of
having been shamefully deserted. “And to break our word and honour
to our party, is a thing no gentleman _can_ do. Wharton had a direct
promise from his lordship, that he never would _come in_ till he should
_come in_ along with him. And now it is confidently said, that Lord
Glistonbury has made his bargain for his own marquisate, and provided
only for himself, his nephew, and his son-in-law.”

Thrown into the utmost consternation by the idea of this double
forfeiture of honour, this breach both of public and private faith,
Vivian, after thanking Colonel S---- for his friendly manner of
communicating this information, and declaring that the transaction was
totally unknown to him, begged that the colonel would do him the favour
and the justice to be present when he should require an explanation from
Lord Glistonbury. To this Colonel S---- consented, and they hastened
in search of his lordship: his lordship was not to be found; but Mr.
Marmaduke Lidhurst was, however, in the coffee-room, and upon Vivian’s
referring to him, he could not deny the truth of the charge, though he
used all his powers of circumlocution to evade giving a direct answer.
The shame, the indignation, that rapidly succeeded to each other in
Vivian’s countenance, sufficiently convinced Colonel S---- that he had
no share in the _private_ part of this disgraceful transaction; and he
very handsomely assured Vivian, that he would set the matter in its
true point of view with his friends. Marmaduke soon found a pretence to
withdraw--some member was speaking in the house, whom he must hear, he
said, and away he went.

At this moment Mr. Wharton, who was walking down the room with his
friends, passed by Vivian, and, as he passed, said,

“That _private vices are public benefits_, we all know; but that public
vices are private benefits, some of us, alas! have yet to learn. But I’d
have that little, whiffling, _most noble and puissant prince_ expectant,
his majesty’s _right trusty and entirely beloved cousin_ elect, know,
that plain Bob Wharton is not a man to be duped and deserted with
impunity.”

“Whom does he mean?--What does he mean?” whispered some of the
bystanders. “What prince is he talking of?--Which of the princes?”

“Oh! none of the princes,” replied another. “You know _most noble and
puissant prince_ is the title of a marquis, and _our right trusty and
entirely beloved cousin_, the style in which the king writes to him.”

“But who is this marquis expectant?”

“Don’t you know?--Lord Glistonbury.”

“But some of his lordship’s friends ought to take it up, surely.”

“Hush!--his son-in-law will hear you.”

“Where?”

“There--don’t look!”

Vivian was, with reason, so much exasperated by the treacherous
duplicity of Lord Glistonbury’s conduct, that he was ill inclined to
undertake his lordship’s defence, and determined to leave it to himself,
or to his nephew; yet the whispers operated not a little upon his
weakness. Wharton, who was walking with his set up and down the room,
again came within Vivian’s hearing, and, as he passed, exclaimed,
“_Public vice!_ and _public virtue!_ precious, well-matched pair!”

“Who is _public vice_, and who is _public virtue_?” said one of
Wharton’s companions.

“Don’t you know?” replied Wharton: “the heir-at-law and the son-in-law.”

On hearing this speech, Vivian, who knew that he was one of the persons
to whom it alluded, started forward to demand an explanation from
Wharton: but Colonel S---- held him back. “You are not called upon, by
any means, to take notice of this,” said the colonel: “Wharton did not
address himself to you, and though he might mean what he said for you,
yet he speaks under a false impression; and besides, he is not quite
sober. Leave it to me, and I will settle it all to your satisfaction
before to-morrow.” Vivian listened unwillingly and uneasily to the
friendly counsel: he was more hurt than he had ever before felt himself
by any of Wharton’s sarcasms, because there was now in them a mixture of
truth; and a man seldom feels more irritable than when he is conscious
that he is partly to blame, and apprehensive that others will think him
more blameable than he really is. His irritability was increased by
the whispers he had heard, and the looks he now perceived among the
bystanders: the voice, the opinion of numbers, the fear of what others
would think or say, operated against his better judgment.

“Come,” said Colonel S----, “let us go and see what they are doing in
the house.”

Vivian refused to stir, saying that it would be leaving the field
to Wharton. Wharton at this instant repassed; and still running the
changes, with half-intoxicated wit, upon the same ideas, reiterated,
“_Public vice!_--We all knew where _that_ would end in these days--in
public honours; but none of you would believe me, when I told you where
_public virtue_ would end--in private treachery!”

“That’s neat!--that’s strong!--faith, that’s home!” whispered some one.

“Mr. Wharton!” cried Vivian, going up to him, “I could not help hearing
what you said just now--did you intend it for me?”

“You heard it, it seems, sir, and that is sufficient,” replied Wharton,
in an insolent tone: “as to what I meant, I presume it is pretty
evident; but, if you think it requires any explanation, I am as ready to
give as you can be to ask it.”

“The sooner the better, then, sir,” said Vivian. The two gentlemen
walked away together, whilst the spectators exclaimed, “Very spirited
indeed!--very right!--very proper!--Vivian could do no less than call
him out. But, after all, what was the quarrel about? Which of them was
to blame?”

Long before these points were settled, the challenge was given and
accepted. Colonel S----, who followed Vivian and Wharton, endeavoured
to set things to rights, by explaining that Vivian had been deceived
by Lord Glistonbury, and kept totally in the dark respecting the
negotiation for the marquisate. But Wharton, aware that by _taking up
the matter immediately in such a spirited way_ he should do himself
infinite honour with his party, and with that majority of the world who
think that the greatest merit of a man is to stand to be shot at,
was not at all willing to listen to these representations. Colonel
S----declared that, were he in Mr. Wharton’s place, he should, without
hesitation, make an apology to Mr. Vivian, and publicly acknowledge that
what he said in the coffee-room was spoken under a false impression,
which a plain statement of facts had totally removed: but Wharton
disdained all terms of accommodation; his policy, pride, and desire of
revenge, all conspired to produce that air of insolent determination
to fight, which, with some people, would obtain the glorious name of
COURAGE. By this sort of courage can men of the most base and profligate
characters often put themselves in a moment upon an equal footing with
men of principle and virtue!

It was settled that Mr. Wharton and Vivian should meet, at eight o’clock
the next morning, in a field near town. Colonel S---- consented to be
Vivian’s second. Russell was not yet returned--not expected till ten the
next day.

Left to his cool reflection, Vivian thought with horror of the misery
into which the event of this duel might involve all with whom he was
connected, and all who were attached to him. The affair was of course to
be kept a secret from all at Glistonbury House, where Vivian was engaged
to dine with a large ministerial party. He went home to dress, hoping
to have a quarter of an hour to himself; but, on entering his own
dressing-room, he, to his surprise and mortification, found his wife
seated there, waiting for him with a face of anxious expectation; a case
of newly-set diamonds on a table beside her. “I thought you were at your
father’s, my dear: are you not to be at Glistonbury House to-day?” said
Vivian.

“No,” replied Lady Sarah. “Surely, Mr. Vivian, you know that my father
gives a political dinner, and I suppose you are to be there?”

“Oh, yes!” cried Vivian; “I did not know what I was saying--I am to
be there, and must dress (looking at his watch), for I have no time to
spare.”

“Be that as it may, I must intrude upon your time for a few minutes,”
 said Lady Sarah.

Vivian stood impatiently attentive, whilst Lady Sarah seemed to find it
difficult to begin some speech which she had prepared.

“Women, I know, have nothing to do with politics,” she began in
a constrained voice; but, suddenly quitting her air and tone of
constraint, she started up and exclaimed, “Oh, my dear, _dear_ husband!
what have you done?--No, no, I cannot, will not believe it, till I hear
it from your OWN lips!”

“What is the matter, my dear Lady Sarah?--You astonish and almost alarm
me!” said Vivian, endeavouring to preserve composure of countenance.

“I will not--Heaven forbid that I should alarm you as I have been
alarmed!” said Lady Sarah, commanding her voice again to a tone of
tranquillity. “I ought, and, if I were not weak, should be convinced
that there is no reason for alarm. There has been some mistake, no
doubt; and I have been to blame for listening to idle reports. Let
me, however, state the facts. Half an hour ago, I was at Gray’s the
jeweller’s, to call for my poor mother’s diamonds, which, you know, he
has reset----”

“Yes--Well!”

“And whilst I was in the shop, a party of gentlemen came in, all of them
unknown to me, and, of course, I was equally unknown to them; for they
began to speak of you in a manner in which none knowing me could venture
in my presence.--They came fresh, as I understand, from the gallery of
the house, where they had been listening to this day's debate.
They said--I cannot bear to repeat or to think of
what they said--you cannot have bartered your public reputation for
a marquisate for my father!--You cannot have done that which is
dishonourable--you cannot have deserted your party for a paltry place
for yourself!--You turn pale.--I wish, if it pleased God, that I was
this moment in my grave!”

“Heaven forbid, my dear Lady Sarah!” cried Vivian, forcing a smile, and
endeavouring to speak in a tone of raillery. “Why should you wish to
be in your grave, because your husband has just got a good warm place?
Live! live!” said he, raising her powerless hand; “for consider--as I
did--and this consideration was of no small weight with me--consider, my
dear Sarah, how much better you will live for it!”

“And you did consider me? And that _did_ weigh with you?”

“--Oh, this is what I dreaded most!” cried Lady Sarah.--“When will you
know my real character? When will you have confidence in your wife, sir?
When will you know the power, the unconquered, unconquerable power of
her affection for you?”

Vivian, much struck by the strength of her expression as she uttered
these words, was a moment silent in astonishment; and then could only,
in an incoherent manner, protest, that he did know--that he had always
done justice to her character--that he believed in her affection--and
had the greatest confidence in its power.

“No, sir, no!--Do not say that which I cannot credit!--You have not
confidence in the power of my affection, or you would never have done
this thing to save me pain. What pain can be so great to me as the
thought of my husband’s reputation suffering abasement?--Do you think
that, in comparison with this, I, your wife, could put the loss of a
service of plate, or house in town, or equipage, or servants, or such
baubles as these?” added she, her eyes glancing upon the diamonds; then,
snatching them up, “Take them, take them!” cried she; “they were my
mother’s; and if her spirit could look down from heaven upon us she
would approve my offer--she would command your acceptance. Then here on
my knees I conjure you, my beloved husband, take them--sell them--sell
plate, furniture, house, equipage, sell every thing rather than your
honour!”

“It is sold,” said Vivian, in a voice of despair.

“Redeem it, redeem it at any price!” cried Lady Sarah. “No! I will kneel
here at your feet--you shall not raise me--till I have obtained this
promise, this justice to me, to yourself!”

“It is too late,” said Vivian, writhing in agony.

“Never too late,” cried Lady Sarah. “Give up the place.--Never too
late!--Give up the place--write this moment, and all will be well; for
your honour will be saved, and the rest is as nothing in my eyes!”

“High-minded woman!” cried Vivian: “why did not I hear you sooner? Why
did not I avail myself of your strength of soul?”

“Use it now--hear me now--let us waste no time in words--here is a pen
and ink--write, my dearest husband! and be yourself again.”

“You waste the energy of your mind on me,” cried Vivian, breaking from
Lady Sarah, and striking his forehead violently; “I am not worthy of
such attachment! It is done--it cannot be undone: I am a weak, ruined,
dishonoured wretch!--I tell you, it CANNOT be undone!”

Lady Sarah rose, and stood in despair. Then, looking up to heaven, she
was silent for some moments. After which, approaching her husband, she
said, in an altered, calm voice, “Since it cannot be undone, I will urge
you no more. But, whether in glory or in shame, you are secure that your
wife will abide by you.”

Vivian embraced her with a tenderness which he had never before felt.
“Excellent woman! in justice to myself, I must tell you,” cried he,
“that I was deceived into this situation. I CAN say no more!”

At this moment a servant knocked at the door, bringing a message from
Lord Glistonbury, to say that all the company were assembled, and that
dinner waited for Mr. Vivian.

“You are not in a fit state to go. Shall I send an apology to my
father?”

“Oh, no! I must go,” cried Vivian, starting up, “I must go, or it will
be thought--or it will be suspected--I can’t explain it to you, my dear;
but I must go--I must _appear_ to-day, and in spirits too, if possible.”

He hurried away. A servant delivered to Lady Sarah a number of notes
and cards. The notes were notes of congratulation, from many of her
acquaintance, upon the report in circulation, that her father was
immediately to be a marquis. The cards were from people who were to be
at her assembly that night. This was one of _her nights_, which were
usually crowded. Lady Sarah’s first wish was to write apologies, and to
say that she was not well enough to see company; but, recollecting
that her husband had said, “he must _appear_, and in spirits, too, if
possible,” she thought that it might be more for their interest, and
according to his wishes, that she should see company, and that no
appearance of dejection should be discerned in his wife. She prepared
herself accordingly, and, with a heavy heart, walked through her
splendid apartments, to see whether the decorations had been properly
executed.

In the mean time Vivian dined at Lord Glistonbury’s, with a large
ministerial party. As soon as he could, after dinner, Vivian got away;
and Lord Glistonbury attributed his retiring early to the awkwardness
he might feel in the company of men whom he had, till now, so violently
opposed. This his lordship thought a foolish _young man’s feeling,_
which would soon wear away. Vivian returned home, anxious to escape from
crowds, and to have some hours of leisure to pass alone; but, the moment
he entered his own house, he saw the great staircase lined with roses
and orange-trees; he found the rooms lighted up and prepared for
company; and Lady Sarah dressed, for the first time, in all her mother’s
diamonds.

“Good Heavens!--Do you see company to-night?” cried he.

“Yes; for I thought, my dear, that you would wish it.”

“I wish it!--Oh! if you knew how I wish to be alone!”

“Then, as no one is yet come, I can still shut my doors, and order them
to say that I am not well enough to see company--I am sure it is true.
Shall I?”

“No, my dear, it is too late,” said Vivian: “I am afraid it is
impossible for you to do that.”

“Not impossible, if you wish it.”

“Well, do as you please.”

“Which is most for your interest? I have no other pleasure.”

“You are too good to me, and I fear I shall never have it in my power to
show you any gratitude----”

“But decide which is best to be done, my dear,” said Lady Sarah.

“Why, my dear, I believe you judged rightly--see your friends, and make
the best of it: but I can appear only for a moment; I have business of
consequence--letters--papers--that must be finished to-night; and I must
go now to my study.”

“You shall not be interrupted,” said Lady Sarah: “I will exert myself as
much as possible.”

A tremendous knock at the door.--Vivian passed through the saloon,
and gained his study, where, after remaining for some time in painful
reflection, he was roused by hearing the clock strike twelve. He
recollected that he had several arrangements to make in his affairs
this night; and that it was incumbent on him to sign and execute a will,
which had been for some time in his possession, with certain blanks not
yet filled up. His wife was, by his marriage settlements, amply provided
for; but he inserted in his will some clauses which he thought would add
to her peculiar comfort, and took care to word them so that his respect
and esteem should be known hereafter to all the world; and that, if
he died, he should leave her the consolation of knowing that his last
feelings for her were those of gratitude and affection. To his mother
he left all that was in his power to contribute to the ease of her
declining years--often obliged to pause whilst he wrote, overcome by
the thoughts of what her grief would be if he died. He left his friend
Russell _in remainder_, to a considerable part of his estate; and he was
just adding the bequest of certain books, which they had read together
in his better days, when the door of the study suddenly opened, and his
mother entered.

“What is all this?” cried she: “immersed in papers at such a time as
this!”

“I so hate crowded assemblies,” said Vivian, huddling his papers
together, and advancing to meet his mother.

“So do I,” said Lady Mary; “but I have been waiting with exemplary
patience where I was stationed by Lady Sarah, at the card-table,
every instant expecting your arrival, that I might have a few minutes’
conversation with you, and inquire how matters went on at the house, and
congratulate----”

Before she had finished the word _congratulate_, she stopped short; for
she had, by this time, a full view of her son’s countenance: and she
knew that countenance so well, that it was impossible to disguise it so
as to deceive her maternal penetration.

“My dear son!” said she, “something is going wrong: I conjure you, tell
me what is the matter!”--Her eye glanced upon the parchments, and she
saw that it was a will. Vivian forced a laugh; and asked her if she
had the weakness some people felt, of disliking to see a will, or of
fancying that a man was going to die if he made his will. Then, to quiet
her apprehensions, and to put a stop to her farther inquiries, he threw
aside his papers, and returned with her to the company, where he exerted
himself to appear as gay as the occasion required. Lord Glistonbury, who
had called in for a few moments, was now playing the great man, as well
as his total want of dignity of mind and manners would permit; he was
answering, in whispers, questions about his marquisate, and sustaining
with all his might his new part of the friend of government. Every thing
conspired to strike Vivian with melancholy--yet he constrained himself
so far, that his _charming spirits_ delighted all who were uninterested
in observing any but the external signs of gaiety; but his mother saw
that his vivacity was forced. She made inquiries from all the gentlemen
of her acquaintance about what had passed the preceding day both at the
House of Commons, and to-day at the dinner at Lord Glistonbury’s: but
those who had been at Lord Glistonbury’s dinner assured her that every
thing had been as amicable as could be; and his ministerial friends said
that every thing had gone on as smoothly as possible at the house:
of what had passed between Mr. Wharton and Vivian in the coffee-room
_nobody could_ give her an account. Baffled, but not satisfied, the
anxious mother sent to the hotel where Mr. Russell lodged, to inquire
whether he was returned to town, and to beg to see him immediately. From
him, she thought, she should learn the truth; or, by his influence over
her son, she hoped that, if there was any danger of a quarrel, it
might be in time prevented. Her servant, however, brought word that
Mr. Russell was not expected from the country till ten o’clock the
next morning; but that her note would be given to him directly on
his arrival. She applied herself next to the study of her daughter’s
countenance, whilst she asked two or three questions, calculated to
discover whether Lady Sarah was under any anxiety about Vivian. But
though Lady Sarah’s countenance exhibited not the slightest variation
under this trial, yet this tranquillity was by no means decisively
satisfactory; because, whatever might be her internal agitation, she
knew that Lady Sarah _could_ maintain the same countenance. Lady Sarah,
who plainly discerned her mother’s anxious curiosity, thought it her
duty to keep her husband’s secrets; and, imagining that she knew the
whole truth, was not farther alarmed by these hints, nor did they lead
her to suspect the real state of the case.

Lady Mary was at length tolerably well satisfied, by a conversation with
her son; during the course of which she settled in her imagination that
he had only been inserting in his will a bequest to his friend Russell;
and that the depression of his spirits arose from the struggle he had
had in determining to vote against his patriotic ideas. She rose to
depart; and Vivian, as he conducted her down stairs, and put her into
her carriage, could scarcely repress his feelings; and he took so tender
a leave of her, that all her apprehensions revived; but there was a
cry of “_Lady--somebody’s_ carriage!” and Lady Mary’s coachman drove
on immediately, without giving her time for one word more. After his
mother’s departure, Vivian, instead of returning to the company, went to
his study, and took this opportunity of finishing his will; but as the
servants were all in attendance at supper he could not get any body to
witness it; and for this he was obliged to wait till a very late hour,
when all the company at last departed. The rattle of carriages at length
died away; and when all was silence, just as he was about to ring for
his witnesses, he heard Lady Sarah’s step coming along the corridor
towards the study: he went out immediately to meet her, drew her arm
within his affectionately, and took two or three turns with her, up and
down the empty saloon, whilst a servant was extinguishing the lights.
Vivian’s mind was so full that he could not speak; and he was scarcely
conscious that he had not spoken, till Lady Sarah broke the silence by
asking if he had finished his business.

“No, my dear, I have more to do yet; but you will oblige me if you will
go to rest--you must be fatigued--mind and body.”

“_You_ seem fatigued almost to death,” said Lady Sarah: “and cannot you
finish the remainder of your business as well to-morrow?”

“No,” replied Vivian; “it must be finished before to-morrow. I am bound
in duty to finish it before to-morrow.”

“If it is a point of duty, I have no more to say,” replied Lady Sarah;
“but,” continued she, in a tone of proud humility, “but if I might so
far intrude upon your confidence, as to inquire----”

“Make no inquiries, my dear; for I cannot answer any, even of yours,”
said Vivian. “And let me beg of you to go to rest; my mind will then
be more at ease. I cannot command my thoughts whilst I am anxious about
you; and I am anxious--more anxious than ever I was in my life--about
you at this moment. You will oblige me if you will go to rest.”

“I CANNOT rest, but I will leave you, since you desire it--I have no
idle curiosity--Good night!”

“Good night! and thank you once more, my excellent wife, for all your
kindness.”

“There cannot be a better woman!” said Vivian to himself as she retired.
“Why have I not loved her as she deserved to be loved? Weak!--alas! weak
in everything! But what a pity, that, with all her virtues, she has, to the
whole orld but me, such ungracious manners! What a pity, that, with such
powers to bear and forbear, she has so little the talent of pleasing! What
a pity, that a too rigid education has prevented her from being as agreeable
and amiable as she is estimable.--But it ill becomes me to blame anyone
but myself. If I live, I will do my utmost to make her happy--if I live,
I will yet repair all. And, if I die, she will have but little reason to
deplore the loss of such a husband.”

Vivian now executed his will--wrote several letters of business--burnt
letters and arranged papers--regretted that Russell, who was to be his
executor, was not near him--made many bitter reflections on the past,
many good resolutions for the future, in case he should survive; then,
overpowered with fatigue of mind, slept for some time, and was awakened
by the clock striking seven. By eight o’clock he was at the place
appointed--Mr. Wharton appeared a few minutes afterwards. Their seconds
having measured out the distance, they took their ground. As Vivian
had given the challenge, Wharton had the first fire. He fired--Vivian
staggered some paces back, fired his pistol into the air, and fell.
The seconds ran to his assistance, and raised him from the ground. The
bullet had entered his chest. He stretched out his hand to Mr. Wharton
in token of forgiveness, and, as soon as he could speak, desired the
seconds to remember that it was he who gave the challenge, and that he
thought he deserved to bear the blame of the quarrel. Wharton, callous
as he was, seemed struck with pity and remorse: he asked what friends
Vivian would wish to have apprised of his situation. A surgeon was in
attendance. Vivian, faint from loss of blood, just pronounced Russell’s
name, and the name of the hotel where he was to be found, adding
“_nobody else_.” Wharton rode off, undertaking to find Mr. Russell;
and Vivian was carried into a little public-house, by the orders of the
surgeon, who thought that he could not bear the motion of a carriage.
Wharton met Mr. Russell, who was coming from town. He had come to London
earlier than he had intended, and, in consequence of Lady Mary Vivian’s
note, which he had received immediately on his arrival, had made such
inquiries as convinced him that her apprehensions were just; and having
discovered the place where the parties were to meet, he had hastened
thither, in hopes of preventing the fatal event. The moment he saw Mr.
Wharton he knew that he was too late. Without asking any other question
than, “Is Vivian alive?” he pressed forwards. The surgeon, who was the
next person he saw, gave him no hopes of his friend’s recovery, but said
he might last till night, or linger perhaps for a day or two. Vivian
had by this time recovered his senses and his speech; but when Russell
entered the room where he lay, he was so much struck by the grief in his
countenance that he could not recollect any one of the many things he
had to say. Russell, the firm Russell, was now quite overcome.

“Yes, my dear friend,” said Vivian; “this is the end of all your
care--of all your hopes of me!--Oh, my poor, poor mother! What will
become of her! Where can we find consolation for her!--You and Selina
Sidney! You know how fond my mother was of her--how fond she was of my
mother--till I, the cause of evil to all my friends, separated them.
You must reunite them. You must repair all. This hope--this hope of your
happiness, my beloved friend, will soothe my last moments!----How much
happier Selina will be with you than----”

Russell sobbed aloud.--“Yes, yield to your feelings, for I know how
strong they are,” said Vivian: “you, that have always felt more for me
than I have ever felt for myself! But it is well for you that my life
ends; for I have never been any thing but a torment and a disgrace to
you!--And yet I had good dispositions!--but there is no time for regret
about myself; I have others to think of, better worth thinking of.”

Vivian called for pen, ink, and paper, had himself raised in his bed,
and supported, whilst he wrote to Selina, and to his mother.

“Do not stop me,” cried he to Russell; “it is the only act of
friendship--the only thing I can do in this world now with pleasure, and
let me do it.”

His notes contained nearly what he had just said to Russell--he put them
open into his friend’s hand; then, good-natured to the last, Vivian took
up his pen again, with no small difficulty, and wrote a few affectionate
words to his wife. “She _well_ deserves this from me,” said he. “Be
a friend to her, Russell--when I am gone, she will, I know, want
consolation,” After Russell had assured him that he would do all he
desired, Vivian said, “I believe there is no one else in the world who
will regret my death, except, perhaps, Lady Julia Lidhurst. How
generous she was to forgive me!--Tell her, I remembered it when I was
dying!--Weakness, weakness of mind!--the cause of all my errors!----Oh,
Russell! how well you knew me from the first!--But all is over
now!--My experience can be of no use to me. I wish it could be useful to
others--There are thousands of young men like me--Every thing swims before my
eyes.----One comfort is, I have not the blood of a fellow-creature
to answer for. My greatest error was making that profligate man my
friend--he was my ruin. I little thought, a few years ago, that I should
die by his hand--but I forgive him, as I hope to be forgiven myself! Is
the clergyman who was sent for come?--My dear Russell, this would be too
severe a task for you.--He is come? Then let me see him.”

Vivian was left for some time to his private devotions. The clergyman
afterwards summoned Russell to return:--he found his friend calmed and
resigned. Vivian stretched out his hand--thanked him once more--and
expired!

“Oh! worthy of a better fate!” thought Russell.--“With such a
heart!--With such talents!--And so young!--With only one fault of
character!--and no vice! Oh, my friend! is it all over?--and all in vain?”

Vivian’s mother and widow arrived just at this moment; and Russell and
Lord Glistonbury, who followed breathless, could not stop them from
entering the apartment. The mother’s grief bordered on distraction; but
it found relief in tears and cries. Lady Sarah shed no tear, and uttered
no exclamation; but advancing, insensible of all opposition, to the bed
on which her dead husband lay, tried whether there was any pulse,
any breath left; then knelt down beside him in silent devotion. Lord
Glistonbury, striking his forehead continually, and striding up and down
the room, repeated, “I killed him!--I killed him!--I was the cause
of his death!--My victim!--My victim!--But take her away!--Take _her_
away--I cannot.--For mercy’s sake, force her away, Mr. Russell!”

“There is no need of force,” said Lady Sarah, rising, as her father
approached; “I am going to leave my husband for ever.”----Then, turning
to Mr. Russell, she inquired if his friend had left any message or
letter for her--desired to see the letter--retired with it--still
without shedding a tear--a few hours afterwards was taken ill, and,
before night, was delivered of a dead son.

Lady Sarah survived, but has never since appeared in what is called the
WORLD.

Both Russell and miss Sidney were so much shocked, by the death of Vivian,
that they could not, for some time, think on any other subject. The hope,
however, that their union may be effected, and the belief that they may
yet be happy, as their united virtues and strength of mind deserve, is
the consoling idea upon which, after so many melancholy events, the mind
of the humane reader may repose.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Dr Johnson.

[2] From some lines of Delille’s, on Rousseau, concluding with the
following:--

“Malheureux! le trépas est donc ton seule asile! Ah! dans la tombe, au
moins, repose enfin tranquille! Ce beau lac, ces flots purs, ces fleurs,
ces gazons frais, Ces pâles peupliers, tout t’invite à la paix. Respire,
donc, enfin, de tes tristes chimères. Vois accourir vers toi les époux,
et les mères. Contemple les amans, qui viennent chaque jour, Verser sur
ton tombeau les larmes de l’amour! Vois ce groupe d’enfans, se jouant
sous l’ombrage, Qui de leur liberté viennent te rendre hommage; Et dis,
en contemplant ce spectacle enchanteur, _Je ne fus point heureux, mais
j’ai fait leur bonheur_.”

Ill-fated mortal! doom’d, alas! to find The grave sole refuge from thy
restless mind. This turf, these flow’rs, this lake, this silent wave,
These poplars pale, that murmur o’er your grave, Invite repose.--Enjoy
the tranquil shore, Where vain chimeras shall torment no more. See to
thy tomb the wife and mother fly, And pour their sorrows where thy ashes
lie! Here the fond youth, and here the blushing maid, Whisper their
loves to thy congenial shade; And grateful children smiling through
their tears, Bless the loved champion of their youthful years: Then
cry, triumphant, from thy honour’d grave-- _Joyless I lived, but joy to
others gave_. C.S.E.


THE END.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TALES AND NOVELS, VOLUME 5 (OF 10) ***

***** This file should be named 9414-0.txt or 9414-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/9/4/1/9414/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


